<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-2-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Ely House.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">John of Gaunt</b> sick, with the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</b>, <abbr>etc.</abbr></i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">John of Gaunt</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Will the king come, that I may breathe my last</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In wholesome counsel to his unstaid youth?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Vex not yourself, nor strive not with your breath;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For all in vain comes counsel to his ear.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">John of Gaunt</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, but they say the tongues of dying men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Enforce attention like deep harmony:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For they breathe truth that breathe their words in pain.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He that no more must say is listen’d more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than they whom youth and ease have taught to glose;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More are men’s ends mark’d than their lives before:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The setting sun, and music at the close,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Writ in remembrance more than things long past:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though Richard my life’s counsel would not hear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My death’s sad tale may yet undeaf his ear.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No; it is stopp’d with other flattering sounds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As praises, of whose taste the wise are fond,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lascivious metres, to whose venom sound</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The open ear of youth doth always listen;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Report of fashions in proud Italy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose manners still our tardy apish nation</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Limps after in base imitation.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where doth the world thrust forth a vanity⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So it be new, there’s no respect how vile⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That is not quickly buzzed into his ears?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then all too late comes counsel to be heard,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where will doth mutiny with wit’s regard.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Direct not him whose way himself will choose:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis breath thou lack’st, and that breath wilt thou lose.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">John of Gaunt</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Methinks I am a prophet new inspired</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thus expiring do foretell of him:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His rash fierce blaze of riot cannot last,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For violent fires soon burn out themselves;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Small showers last long, but sudden storms are short;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With eager feeding food doth choke the feeder:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Light vanity, insatiate cormorant,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Consuming means, soon preys upon itself.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This royal throne of kings, this scepter’d isle,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This other Eden, demi-paradise,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This fortress built by Nature for herself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against infection and the hand of war,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This happy breed of men, this little world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This precious stone set in the silver sea,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which serves it in the office of a wall,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or as a moat defensive to a house,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against the envy of less happier lands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This nurse, this teeming womb of royal kings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fear’d by their breed and famous by their birth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Renowned for their deeds as far from home,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For Christian service and true chivalry,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As is the sepulchre in stubborn Jewry,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of the world’s ransom, blessed Mary’s Son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This land of such dear souls, this dear dear land,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dear for her reputation through the world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is now leased out, I die pronouncing it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like to a tenement or pelting farm:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>England, bound in with the triumphant sea</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of watery Neptune, is now bound in with shame,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With inky blots and rotten parchment bonds:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That England, that was wont to conquer others,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath made a shameful conquest of itself.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, would the scandal vanish with my life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How happy then were my ensuing death!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of Aumerle</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bushy</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Green</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bagot</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Ross</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Willoughby</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The king is come: deal mildly with his youth;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For young hot colts being raged do rage the more.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td>How fares our noble uncle, Lancaster?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td>What comfort, man? how is’t with aged Gaunt?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">John of Gaunt</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O how that name befits my composition!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Old Gaunt indeed, and gaunt in being old:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within me grief hath kept a tedious fast;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And who abstains from meat that is not gaunt?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For sleeping England long time have I watch’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Watching breeds leanness, leanness is all gaunt:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The pleasure that some fathers feed upon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is my strict fast; I mean, my children’s looks;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therein fasting, hast thou made me gaunt:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose hollow womb inherits nought but bones.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td>Can sick men play so nicely with their names?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">John of Gaunt</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, misery makes sport to mock itself:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since thou dost seek to kill my name in me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I mock my name, great king, to flatter thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td>Should dying men flatter with those that live?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">John of Gaunt</td>
							<td>No, no, men living flatter those that die.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td>Thou, now a-dying, say’st thou flatterest me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">John of Gaunt</td>
							<td>O, no! thou diest, though I the sicker be.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td>I am in health, I breathe, and see thee ill.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">John of Gaunt</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now He that made me knows I see thee ill;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ill in myself to see, and in thee seeing ill.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy death-bed is no lesser than thy land</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wherein thou liest in reputation sick;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou, too careless patient as thou art,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commit’st thy anointed body to the cure</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of those physicians that first wounded thee:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A thousand flatterers sit within thy crown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose compass is no bigger than thy head;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet, incaged in so small a verge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The waste is no whit lesser than thy land.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, had thy grandsire with a prophet’s eye</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seen how his son’s son should destroy his sons,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Deposing thee before thou wert possess’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which art possess’d now to depose thyself.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why, cousin, wert thou regent of the world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It were a shame to let this land by lease;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But for thy world enjoying but this land,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is it not more than shame to shame it so?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Landlord of England art thou now, not king:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy state of law is bondslave to the law; And thou⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A lunatic lean-witted fool,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Presuming on an ague’s privilege,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Darest with thy frozen admonition</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make pale our cheek, chasing the royal blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With fury from his native residence.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, by my seat’s right royal majesty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wert thou not brother to great Edward’s son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This tongue that runs so roundly in thy head</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should run thy head from thy unreverent shoulders.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">John of Gaunt</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, spare me not, my brother Edward’s son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For that I was his father Edward’s son;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That blood already, like the pelican,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hast thou tapp’d out and drunkenly caroused:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My brother Gloucester, plain well-meaning soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom fair befal in heaven “mongst happy souls!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May be a precedent and witness good</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou respect’st not spilling Edward’s blood:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Join with the present sickness that I have;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thy unkindness be like crooked age,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To crop at once a too long wither’d flower.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Live in thy shame, but die not shame with thee!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These words hereafter thy tormentors be!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Convey me to my bed, then to my grave:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Love they to live that love and honour have. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit, borne off by his Attendants.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And let them die that age and sullens have;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For both hast thou, and both become the grave.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I do beseech your majesty, impute his words</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To wayward sickliness and age in him:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He loves you, on my life, and holds you dear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As Harry Duke of Hereford, were he here.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Right, you say true: as Hereford’s love, so his;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As theirs, so mine; and all be as it is.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td>My liege, old Gaunt commends him to your majesty.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td>What says he?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, nothing; all is said</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His tongue is now a stringless instrument;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Words, life and all, old Lancaster hath spent.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Be York the next that must be bankrupt so!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though death be poor, it ends a mortal woe.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The ripest fruit first falls, and so doth he;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His time is spent, our pilgrimage must be.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So much for that. Now for our Irish wars:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We must supplant those rough rug-headed kerns,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which live like venom where no venom else</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But only they have privilege to live.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And for these great affairs do ask some charge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Towards our assistance we do seize to us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The plate, corn, revenues and moveables,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whereof our uncle Gaunt did stand possess’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How long shall I be patient? ah, how long</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall tender duty make me suffer wrong?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not Gloucester’s death, nor Hereford’s banishment</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not Gaunt’s rebukes, nor England’s private wrongs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor the prevention of poor Bolingbroke</span>
									<br/>
									<span>About his marriage, nor my own disgrace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have ever made me sour my patient cheek,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or bend one wrinkle on my sovereign’s face.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am the last of noble Edward’s sons,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of whom thy father, Prince of Wales, was first:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In war was never lion raged more fierce,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In peace was never gentle lamb more mild,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than was that young and princely gentleman.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His face thou hast, for even so look’d he,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Accomplish’d with the number of thy hours;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But when he frown’d, it was against the French</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And not against his friends; his noble hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did will what he did spend and spent not that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which his triumphant father’s hand had won;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His hands were guilty of no kindred blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But bloody with the enemies of his kin.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O Richard! York is too far gone with grief,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or else he never would compare between.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td>Why, uncle, what’s the matter?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O my liege,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pardon me, if you please; if n ot, I, pleased</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not to be pardon’d, am content withal.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seek you to seize and gripe into your hands</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The royalties and rights of banish’d Hereford?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is not Gaunt dead, and doth not Hereford live?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was not Gaunt just, and is not Harry true?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did not the one deserve to have an heir?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is not his heir a well-deserving son?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take Hereford’s rights away, and take from Time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His charters and his customary rights;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let not to-morrow then ensue to-day;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be not thyself; for how art thou a king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But by fair sequence and succession?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, afore God⁠—God forbid I say true!⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If you do wrongfully seize Hereford’s rights,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Call in the letters patent that he hath</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By his attorneys-general to sue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His livery, and deny his offer’d homage,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You pluck a thousand dangers on your head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You lose a thousand well-disposed hearts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And prick my tender patience, to those thoughts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which honour and allegiance cannot think.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Think what you will, we seize into our hands</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His plate, his goods, his money and his lands.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ll not be by the while: my liege, farewell:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What will ensue hereof, there’s none can tell;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But by bad courses may be understood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That their events can never fall out good. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go, Bushy, to the Earl of Wiltshire straight:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bid him repair to us to Ely House</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To see this business. To-morrow next</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We will for Ireland; and ’tis time, I trow:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we create, in absence of ourself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our uncle York lord governor of England;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For he is just and always loved us well.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come on, our queen: to-morrow must we part;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be merry, for our time of stay is short <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of Aumerle</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bushy</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Green</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bagot</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td>Well, lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Ross</td>
							<td>And living too; for now his son is duke.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Willoughby</td>
							<td>Barely in title, not in revenue.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td>Richly in both, if justice had her right.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Ross</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My heart is great; but it must break with silence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ere’t be disburden’d with a liberal tongue.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, speak thy mind; and let him ne’er speak more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That speaks thy words again to do thee harm!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Willoughby</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tends that thou wouldst speak to the Duke of Hereford?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If it be so, out with it boldly, man;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Ross</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No good at all that I can do for him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless you call it good to pity him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bereft and gelded of his patrimony.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, afore God, ’tis shame such wrongs are borne</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In him, a royal prince, and many moe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of noble blood in this declining land.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king is not himself, but basely led</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By flatterers; and what they will inform,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Merely in hate, ’gainst any of us all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That will the king severely prosecute</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Gainst us, our lives, our children, and our heirs.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Ross</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The commons hath he pill’d with grievous taxes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And quite lost their hearts: the nobles hath he fined</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For ancient quarrels, and quite lost their hearts.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Willoughby</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And daily new exactions are devised,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As blanks, benevolences, and I wot not what:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But what, o” God’s name, doth become of this?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Wars have not wasted it, for warr’d he hath not,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But basely yielded upon compromise</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That which his noble ancestors achieved with blows:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More hath he spent in peace than they in wars.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Ross</td>
							<td>The Earl of Wiltshire hath the realm in farm.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Willoughby</td>
							<td>The king’s grown bankrupt, like a broken man.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td>Reproach and dissolution hangeth over him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Ross</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He hath not money for these Irish wars,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His burthenous taxations notwithstanding,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But by the robbing of the banish’d duke.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>His noble kinsman: most degenerate king!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, lords, we hear this fearful tempest sing,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet see no shelter to avoid the storm;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We see the wind sit sore upon our sails,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet we strike not, but securely perish.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Ross</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We see the very wreck that we must suffer;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And unavoided is the danger now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For suffering so the causes of our wreck.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not so; even through the hollow eyes of death</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I spy life peering; but I dare not say</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How near the tidings of our comfort is.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Willoughby</td>
							<td>Nay, let us share thy thoughts, as thou dost ours.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Ross</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Be confident to speak, Northumberland:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We three are but thyself; and, speaking so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy words are but as thoughts; therefore, be bold.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then thus: I have from Port le Blanc, a bay</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In Brittany, received intelligence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Harry Duke of Hereford, Rainold Lord Cobham,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That late broke from the Duke of Exeter,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His brother, Archbishop late of Canterbury,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sir Thomas Erpingham, Sir John Ramston,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sir John Norbery, Sir Robert Waterton and Francis Quoint,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All these well furnish’d by the Duke of Bretagne</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With eight tall ships, three thousand men of war,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are making hither with all due expedience</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And shortly mean to touch our northern shore:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Perhaps they had ere this, but that they stay</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The first departing of the king for Ireland.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Imp out our drooping country’s broken wing,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Redeem from broking pawn the blemish’d crown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wipe off the dust that hides our sceptre’s gilt</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make high majesty look like itself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Away with me in post to Ravenspurgh;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But if you faint, as fearing to do so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stay and be secret, and myself will go.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Ross</td>
							<td>To horse, to horse! urge doubts to them that fear.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Willoughby</td>
							<td>Hold out my horse, and I will first be there. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The palace.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bushy</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bagot</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bushy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Madam, your majesty is too much sad:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You promised, when you parted with the king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To lay aside life-harming heaviness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And entertain a cheerful disposition.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To please the king I did; to please myself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I cannot do it; yet I know no cause</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why I should welcome such a guest as grief,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As my sweet Richard: yet again, methinks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some unborn sorrow, ripe in fortune’s womb,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is coming towards me, and my inward soul</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With nothing trembles: at some thing it grieves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More than with parting from my lord the king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bushy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which shows like grief itself, but is not so;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For sorrow’s eye, glazed with blinding tears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Divides one thing entire to many objects;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like perspectives, which rightly gazed upon</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Show nothing but confusion, eyed awry</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Distinguish form: so your sweet majesty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Looking awry upon your lord’s departure,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Find shapes of grief, more than himself, to wail;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which, look’d on as it is, is nought but shadows</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of what it is not. Then, thrice-gracious queen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More than your lord’s departure weep not: more’s not seen;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or if it be, ’tis with false sorrow’s eye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which for things true weeps things imaginary.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It may be so; but yet my inward soul</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Persuades me it is otherwise: howe’er it be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I cannot but be sad; so heavy sad</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As, though on thinking on no thought I think,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Makes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bushy</td>
							<td>’Tis nothing but conceit, my gracious lady.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis nothing less: conceit is still derived</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From some forefather grief; mine is not so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For nothing had begot my something grief;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or something hath the nothing that I grieve:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis in reversion that I do possess;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But what it is, that is not yet known; what</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I cannot name; ’tis nameless woe, I wot.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Green</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Green</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>God save your majesty! and well met, gentlemen:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I hope the king is not yet shipp’d for Ireland.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why hopest thou so? ’tis better hope he is;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For his designs crave haste, his haste good hope:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then wherefore dost thou hope he is not shipp’d?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Green</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That he, our hope, might have retired his power,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And driven into despair an enemy’s hope,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who strongly hath set footing in this land:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The banish’d Bolingbroke repeals himself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with uplifted arms is safe arrived</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At Ravenspurgh.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td>Now God in heaven forbid!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Green</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, madam, ’tis too true: and that is worse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Lord Northumberland, his son young Henry Percy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Lords of Ross, Beaumond, and Willoughby,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With all their powerful friends, are fled to him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bushy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why have you not proclaim’d Northumberland</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all the rest revolted faction traitors?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Green</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We have: whereupon the Earl of Worcester</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath broke his staff, resign’d his stewardship,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all the household servants fled with him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Bolingbroke.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So, Green, thou art the midwife to my woe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Bolingbroke my sorrow’s dismal heir:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now hath my soul brought forth her prodigy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I, a gasping new-deliver’d mother,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have woe to woe, sorrow to sorrow join’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bushy</td>
							<td>Despair not, madam.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Who shall hinder me?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will despair, and be at enmity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With cozening hope: he is a flatterer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A parasite, a keeper back of death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who gently would dissolve the bands of life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which false hope lingers in extremity.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Green</td>
							<td>Here comes the Duke of York.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>With signs of war about his aged neck:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, full of careful business are his looks!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Uncle, for God’s sake, speak comfortable words.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Should I do so, I should belie my thoughts:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Comfort’s in heaven; and we are on the earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where nothing lives but crosses, cares and grief.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your husband, he is gone to save far off,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whilst others come to make him lose at home:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here am I left to underprop his land,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, weak with age, cannot support myself:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now shall he try his friends that flatter’d him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Servant</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Servant</td>
							<td>My lord, your son was gone before I came.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He was? Why, so! go all which way it will!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The nobles they are fled, the commons they are cold,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And will, I fear, revolt on Hereford’s side.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sirrah, get thee to Plashy, to my sister Gloucester;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bid her send me presently a thousand pound:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hold, take my ring.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Servant</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, I had forgot to tell your lordship,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To-day, as I came by, I called there;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I shall grieve you to report the rest.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td>What is’t, knave?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Servant</td>
							<td>An hour before I came, the duchess died.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>God for his mercy! what a tide of woes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Comes rushing on this woeful land at once!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know not what to do: I would to God,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So my untruth had not provoked him to it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king had cut off my head with my brother’s.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What, are there no posts dispatch’d for Ireland?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How shall we do for money for these wars?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, sister⁠—cousin, I would say⁠—pray, pardon me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go, fellow, get thee home, provide some carts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bring away the armour that is there. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Servant</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gentlemen, will you go muster men?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I know how or which way to order these affairs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thus thrust disorderly into my hands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Never believe me. Both are my kinsmen:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The one is my sovereign, whom both my oath</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And duty bids defend; the other again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is my kinsman, whom the king hath wrong’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom conscience and my kindred bids to right.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well, somewhat we must do. Come, cousin, I’ll</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dispose of you.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gentlemen, go, muster up your men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And meet me presently at Berkeley.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I should to Plashy too;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But time will not permit: all is uneven,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And every thing is left at six and seven. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bushy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The wind sits fair for news to go to Ireland,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But none returns. For us to levy power</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Proportionable to the enemy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is all unpossible.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Green</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Besides, our nearness to the king in love</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is near the hate of those love not the king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bagot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And that’s the wavering commons: for their love</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lies in their purses, and whoso empties them</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By so much fills their hearts with deadly hate.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bushy</td>
							<td>Wherein the king stands generally condemn’d.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bagot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If judgement lie in them, then so do we,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because we ever have been near the king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Green</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well, I will for refuge straight to Bristol castle:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Earl of Wiltshire is already there.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bushy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thither will I with you; for little office</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The hateful commons will perform for us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Except like curs to tear us all to pieces.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will you go along with us?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bagot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No; I will to Ireland to his majesty.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Farewell: if heart’s presages be not vain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We three here art that ne’er shall meet again.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bushy</td>
							<td>That’s as York thrives to beat back Bolingbroke.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Green</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Alas, poor duke! the task he undertakes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is numbering sands and drinking oceans dry:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where one on his side fights, thousands will fly.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Farewell at once, for once, for all, and ever.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bushy</td>
							<td>Well, we may meet again.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bagot</td>
							<td>I fear me, never. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-3" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Wilds in Gloucestershire.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</b>, with Forces.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>How far is it, my lord, to Berkeley now?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Believe me, noble lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am a stranger here in Gloucestershire:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These high wild hills and rough uneven ways</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Draws out our miles, and makes them wearisome,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Making the hard way sweet and delectable.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I bethink me what a weary way</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From Ravenspurgh to Cotswold will be found</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In Ross and Willoughby, wanting your company,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which, I protest, hath very much beguiled</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The tediousness and process of my travel:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But theirs is sweetened with the hope to have</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The present benefit which I possess;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hope to joy is little less in joy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than hope enjoy’d: by this the weary lords</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall make their way seem short, as mine hath done</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By sight of what I have, your noble company.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Of much less value is my company</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than your good words. But who comes here?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Percy</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It is my son, young Harry Percy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sent from my brother Worcester, whencesoever.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Harry, how fares your uncle?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Percy</td>
							<td>I had thought, my lord, to have learn’d his health of you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td>Why, is he not with the queen?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Percy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, my good Lord; he hath forsook the court,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Broken his staff of office and dispersed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The household of the king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What was his reason?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He was not so resolved when last we spake together.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Percy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Because your lordship was proclaimed traitor.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But he, my lord, is gone to Ravenspurgh,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To offer service to the Duke of Hereford,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sent me over by Berkeley, to discover</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What power the Duke of York had levied there;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then with directions to repair to Ravenspurgh.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td>Have you forgot the Duke of Hereford, boy?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Percy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, my good lord, for that is not forgot</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which ne’er I did remember: to my knowledge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I never in my life did look on him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td>Then learn to know him now; this is the duke.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Percy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My gracious lord, I tender you my service,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such as it is, being tender, raw and young:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which elder days shall ripen and confirm</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To more approved service and desert.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I thank thee, gentle Percy; and be sure</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I count myself in nothing else so happy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As in a soul remembering my good friends;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, as my fortune ripens with thy love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It shall be still thy true love’s recompense:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My heart this covenant makes, my hand thus seals it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How far is it to Berkeley? and what stir</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Keeps good old York there with his men of war?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Percy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>There stands the castle, by yon tuft of trees,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mann’d with three hundred men, as I have heard;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in it are the Lords of York, Berkeley, and Seymour;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>None else of name and noble estimate.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Ross</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Willoughby</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Here come the Lords of Ross and Willoughby,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bloody with spurring, fiery-red with haste.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Welcome, my lords. I wot your love pursues</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A banish’d traitor: all my treasury</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is yet but unfelt thanks, which more enrich’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall be your love and labour’s recompense.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Ross</td>
							<td>Your presence makes us rich, most noble lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Willoughby</td>
							<td>And far surmounts our labour to attain it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Evermore thanks, the exchequer of the poor;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which, till my infant fortune comes to years,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stands for my bounty. But who comes here?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Berkeley</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td>It is my Lord of Berkeley, as I guess.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Berkeley</td>
							<td>My Lord of Hereford, my message is to you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, my answer is⁠—to Lancaster;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I am come to seek that name in England;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I must find that title in your tongue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before I make reply to aught you say.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Berkeley</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Mistake me not, my lord; ’tis not my meaning</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To raze one title of your honour out:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To you, my lord, I come, what lord you will,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From the most gracious regent of this land,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Duke of York, to know what pricks you on</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To take advantage of the absent time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fright our native peace with self-born arms.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</b> attended.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I shall not need transport my words by you;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here comes his grace in person. My noble uncle! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kneels.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Show me thy humble heart, and not thy knee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose duty is deceiveable and false.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>My gracious uncle⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tut, tut!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Grace me no grace, nor uncle me no uncle:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am no traitor’s uncle; and that word “grace.”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In an ungracious mouth is but profane.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why have those banish’d and forbidden legs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dared once to touch a dust of England’s ground?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But then more “why?” why have they dared to march</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So many miles upon her peaceful bosom,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Frighting her pale-faced villages with war</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ostentation of despised arms?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Comest thou because the anointed king is hence?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why, foolish boy, the king is left behind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in my loyal bosom lies his power.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were I but now the lord of such hot youth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As when brave Gaunt, thy father, and myself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From forth the ranks of many thousand French,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, then how quickly should this arm of mine.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now prisoner to the palsy, chastise thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And minister correction to thy fault!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My gracious uncle, let me know my fault:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On what condition stands it and wherein?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Even in condition of the worst degree,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In gross rebellion and detested treason:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou art a banish’d man, and here art come</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before the expiration of thy time,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In braving arms against thy sovereign.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As I was banish’d, I was banish’d Hereford;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But as I come, I come for Lancaster.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, noble uncle, I beseech your grace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Look on my wrongs with an indifferent eye:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are my father, for methinks in you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I see old Gaunt alive; O, then, my father,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will you permit that I shall stand condemn’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A wandering vagabond; my rights and royalties</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pluck’d from my arms perforce and given away</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To upstart unthrifts? Wherefore was I born?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If that my cousin king be King of England,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It must be granted I am Duke of Lancaster.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You have a son, Aumerle, my noble cousin;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had you first died, and he been thus trod down,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He should have found his uncle Gaunt a father,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am denied to sue my livery here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet my letters-patents give me leave:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My father’s goods are all distrain’d and sold,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And these and all are all amiss employ’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What would you have me do? I am a subject,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I challenge law: attorneys are denied me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore, personally I lay my claim</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To my inheritance of free descent.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td>The noble duke hath been too much abused.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Ross</td>
							<td>It stands your grace upon to do him right.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Willoughby</td>
							<td>Base men by his endowments are made great.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lords of England, let me tell you this:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have had feeling of my cousin’s wrongs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And laboured all I could to do him right;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But in this kind to come, in braving arms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be his own carver and cut out his way,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To find out right with wrong, it may not be;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And you that do abet him in this kind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cherish rebellion and are rebels all.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The noble duke hath sworn his coming is</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But for his own; and for the right of that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We all have strongly sworn to give him aid;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let him ne’er see joy that breaks that oath!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well, well, I see the issue of these arms:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I cannot mend it, I must needs confess,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because my power is weak and all ill left:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But if I could, by Him that gave me life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would attach you all and make you stoop</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unto the sovereign mercy of the king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But since I cannot, be it known to you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do remain as neuter. So, fare you well;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless you please to enter in the castle</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And there repose you for this night.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>An offer, uncle, that we will accept:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But we must win your grace to go with us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Bristol castle, which they say is held</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By Bushy, Bagot and their complices,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The caterpillars of the commonwealth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which I have sworn to weed and pluck away.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It may be I will go with you: but yet I’ll pause;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I am loath to break our country’s laws.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor friends nor foes, to me welcome you are:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Things past redress are now with me past care. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-4" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A camp in Wales.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Earl of Salisbury</b> and a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Welsh Captain</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Captain</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord of Salisbury, we have stay’d ten days,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hardly kept our countrymen together,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet we hear no tidings from the king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore we will disperse ourselves: farewell.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Earl of Salisbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Stay yet another day, thou trusty Welshman:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king reposeth all his confidence in thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Captain</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis thought the king is dead; we will not stay.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The bay-trees in our country are all wither’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The pale-faced moon looks bloody on the earth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And lean-look’d prophets whisper fearful change;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rich men look sad and ruffians dance and leap,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The one in fear to lose what they enjoy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The other to enjoy by rage and war:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These signs forerun the death or fall of kings.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Farewell: our countrymen are gone and fled,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As well assured Richard their king is dead. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Earl of Salisbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, Richard, with the eyes of heavy mind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I see thy glory like a shooting star</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fall to the base earth from the firmament.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy sun sets weeping in the lowly west,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Witnessing storms to come, woe and unrest:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy friends are fled to wait upon thy foes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And crossly to thy good all fortune goes. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
