<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-3-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Bristol. Before the castle.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Ross</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Percy</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Willoughby</b>, with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bushy</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Green</b>, prisoners.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Bring forth these men.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bushy and Green, I will not vex your souls⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since presently your souls must part your bodies⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With too much urging your pernicious lives,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For ’twere no charity; yet, to wash your blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From off my hands, here in the view of men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will unfold some causes of your deaths.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You have misled a prince, a royal king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A happy gentleman in blood and lineaments,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By you unhappied and disfigured clean:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You have in manner with your sinful hours</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Made a divorce betwixt his queen and him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Broke the possession of a royal bed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And stain’d the beauty of a fair queen’s cheeks</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With tears drawn from her eyes by your foul wrongs.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Myself, a prince by fortune of my birth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Near to the king in blood, and near in love</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till you did make him misinterpret me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have stoop’d my neck under your injuries,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sigh’d my English breath in foreign clouds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Eating the bitter bread of banishment;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whilst you have fed upon my signories,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dispark’d my parks and fell’d my forest woods,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From my own windows torn my household coat,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Razed out my imprese, leaving me no sign,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Save men’s opinions and my living blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To show the world I am a gentleman.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This and much more, much more than twice all this,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Condemns you to the death. See them deliver’d over</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To execution and the hand of death.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bushy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>More welcome is the stroke of death to me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than Bolingbroke to England. Lords, farewell.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Green</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My comfort is that heaven will take our souls</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And plague injustice with the pains of hell.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My Lord Northumberland, see them dispatch’d. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</b> and others, with the prisoners.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Uncle, you say the queen is at your house;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For God’s sake, fairly let her be entreated:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell her I send to her my kind commends;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take special care my greetings be deliver’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A gentleman of mine I have dispatch’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With letters of your love to her at large.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thank, gentle uncle. Come, lords, away.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To fight with Glendower and his complices:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Awhile to work, and after holiday. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-3-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The coast of Wales. A castle in view.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Drums; flourish and colours. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></b>, the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Carlisle</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of Aumerle</b>, and Soldiers.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td>Barkloughly castle call they this at hand?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of Aumerle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yea, my lord. How brooks your grace the air,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>After your late tossing on the breaking seas?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Needs must I like it well: I weep for joy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To stand upon my kingdom once again.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dear earth, I do salute thee with my hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though rebels wound thee with their horses’ hoofs:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As a long-parted mother with her child</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Plays fondly with her tears and smiles in meeting,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So, weeping, smiling, greet I thee, my earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And do thee favours with my royal hands.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Feed not thy sovereign’s foe, my gentle earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor with thy sweets comfort his ravenous sense;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But let thy spiders, that suck up thy venom,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And heavy-gaited toads lie in their way,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doing annoyance to the treacherous feet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which with usurping steps do trample thee:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yield stinging nettles to mine enemies;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when they from thy bosom pluck a flower,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Guard it, I pray thee, with a lurking adder</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose double tongue may with a mortal touch</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Throw death upon thy sovereign’s enemies.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mock not my senseless conjuration, lords:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This earth shall have a feeling and these stones</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Prove armed soldiers, ere her native king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall falter under foul rebellion’s arms.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Carlisle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fear not, my lord: that Power that made you king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath power to keep you king in spite of all.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The means that heaven yields must be embraced,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And not neglected; else, if heaven would,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we will not, heaven’s offer we refuse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The proffer’d means of succor and redress.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of Aumerle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He means, my lord, that we are too remiss;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whilst Bolingbroke, through our security,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Grows strong and great in substance and in power.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Discomfortable cousin! know’st thou not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That when the searching eye of heaven is hid,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Behind the globe, that lights the lower world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then thieves and robbers range abroad unseen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In murders and in outrage, boldly here;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But when from under this terrestrial ball</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He fires the proud tops of the eastern pines</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And darts his light through every guilty hole,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then murders, treasons and detested sins,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The cloak of night being pluck’d from off their backs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stand bare and naked, trembling at themselves?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So when this thief, this traitor, Bolingbroke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who all this while hath revell’d in the night</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whilst we were wandering with the antipodes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall see us rising in our throne, the east,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His treasons will sit blushing in his face,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not able to endure the sight of day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But self-affrighted tremble at his sin.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not all the water in the rough rude sea</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can wash the balm off from an anointed king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The breath of worldly men cannot depose</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The deputy elected by the Lord:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For every man that Bolingbroke hath press’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To lift shrewd steel against our golden crown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>God for his Richard hath in heavenly pay</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A glorious angel: then, if angels fight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Weak men must fall, for heaven still guards the right.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Earl of Salisbury</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Welcome, my lord how far off lies your power?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Earl of Salisbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nor near nor farther off, my gracious lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than this weak arm: discomfort guides my tongue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bids me speak of nothing but despair.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One day too late, I fear me, noble lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath clouded all thy happy days on earth:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, call back yesterday, bid time return,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou shalt have twelve thousand fighting men!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To-day, to-day, unhappy day, too late,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O’erthrows thy joys, friends, fortune and thy state:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For all the Welshmen, hearing thou wert dead.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are gone to Bolingbroke, dispersed and fled.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of Aumerle</td>
							<td>Comfort, my liege; why looks your grace so pale?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But now the blood of twenty thousand men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did triumph in my face, and they are fled;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, till so much blood thither come again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have I not reason to look pale and dead?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All souls that will be safe fly from my side,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For time hath set a blot upon my pride.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of Aumerle</td>
							<td>Comfort, my liege; remember who you are.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I had forgot myself; am I not king?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Awake, thou coward majesty! thou sleepest.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is not the king’s name twenty thousand names?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Arm, arm, my name! a puny subject strikes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At thy great glory. Look not to the ground,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ye favourites of a king: are we not high?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>High be our thoughts: I know my uncle York</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath power enough to serve our turn. But who comes here?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Stephen Scroop</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Stephen Scroop</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>More health and happiness betide my liege</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than can my care-tuned tongue deliver him!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Mine ear is open and my heart prepared;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The worst is worldly loss thou canst unfold.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say, is my kingdom lost? why, ’twas my care</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what loss is it to be rid of care?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Strives Bolingbroke to be as great as we?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Greater he shall not be; if he serve God,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’ll serve Him too and be his fellow so:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Revolt our subjects? that we cannot mend;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They break their faith to God as well as us:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cry woe, destruction, ruin and decay:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The worst is death, and death will have his day.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Stephen Scroop</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Glad am I that your highness is so arm’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To bear the tidings of calamity.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like an unseasonable stormy day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which makes the silver rivers drown their shores,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As if the world were all dissolved to tears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So high above his limits swells the rage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Bolingbroke, covering your fearful land</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With hard bright steel and hearts harder than steel.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>White-beards have arm’d their thin and hairless scalps</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against thy majesty; boys, with women’s voices,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Strive to speak big and clap their female joints</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In stiff unwieldy arms against thy crown:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The very beadsmen learn to bend their bows</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of double-fatal yew against thy state;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, distaff-women manage rusty bills</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against thy seat: both young and old rebel,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all goes worse than I have power to tell.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Too well, too well thou tell’st a tale so ill.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where is the Earl of Wiltshire? where is Bagot?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What is become of Bushy? where is Green?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That they have let the dangerous enemy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Measure our confines with such peaceful steps?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If we prevail, their heads shall pay for it:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I warrant they have made peace with Bolingbroke.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Stephen Scroop</td>
							<td>Peace have they made with him indeed, my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O villains, vipers, damn’d without redemption!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dogs, easily won to fawn on any man!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Snakes, in my heart-blood warm’d, that sting my heart!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Three Judases, each one thrice worse than Judas!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would they make peace? terrible hell make war</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon their spotted souls for this offence!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Stephen Scroop</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sweet love, I see, changing his property,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Turns to the sourest and most deadly hate:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Again uncurse their souls; their peace is made</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With heads, and not with hands; those whom you curse</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have felt the worst of death’s destroying wound</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And lie full low, graved in the hollow ground.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of Aumerle</td>
							<td>Is Bushy, Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Stephen Scroop</td>
							<td>Ay, all of them at Bristol lost their heads.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of Aumerle</td>
							<td>Where is the duke my father with his power?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No matter where; of comfort no man speak:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let’s talk of graves, of worms, and epitaphs;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make dust our paper and with rainy eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Write sorrow on the bosom of the earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let’s choose executors and talk of wills:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet not so, for what can we bequeath</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Save our deposed bodies to the ground?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our lands, our lives and all are Bolingbroke’s,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And nothing can we call our own but death</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that small model of the barren earth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which serves as paste and cover to our bones.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For God’s sake, let us sit upon the ground</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tell sad stories of the death of kings;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How some have been deposed; some slain in war,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some haunted by the ghosts they have deposed;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some poison’d by their wives: some sleeping kill’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All murder’d: for within the hollow crown</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That rounds the mortal temples of a king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Keeps Death his court and there the antic sits,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Scoffing his state and grinning at his pomp,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Allowing him a breath, a little scene,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To monarchize, be fear’d and kill with looks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Infusing him with self and vain conceit,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As if this flesh which walls about our life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were brass impregnable, and humour’d thus</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Comes at the last and with a little pin</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bores through his castle wall, and farewell king!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cover your heads and mock not flesh and blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With solemn reverence: throw away respect,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tradition, form and ceremonious duty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For you have but mistook me all this while:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I live with bread like you, feel want,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Taste grief, need friends: subjected thus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How can you say to me, I am a king?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Carlisle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, wise men ne’er sit and wail their woes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But presently prevent the ways to wail.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To fear the foe, since fear oppresseth strength,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gives in your weakness strength unto your foe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so your follies fight against yourself.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fear and be slain; no worse can come to fight:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fight and die is death destroying death;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where fearing dying pays death servile breath.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of Aumerle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My father hath a power; inquire of him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And learn to make a body of a limb.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou chidest me well: proud Bolingbroke, I come</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To change blows with thee for our day of doom.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This ague fit of fear is over-blown;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An easy task it is to win our own.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say, Scroop, where lies our uncle with his power?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speak sweetly, man, although thy looks be sour.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Stephen Scroop</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Men judge by the complexion of the sky</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The state and inclination of the day:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So may you by my dull and heavy eye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My tongue hath but a heavier tale to say.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I play the torturer, by small and small</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To lengthen out the worst that must be spoken:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your uncle York is join’d with Bolingbroke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all your northern castles yielded up,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all your southern gentlemen in arms</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon his party.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou hast said enough.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beshrew thee, cousin, which didst lead me forth <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of Aumerle</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of that sweet way I was in to despair!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What say you now? what comfort have we now?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By heaven, I’ll hate him everlastingly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That bids me be of comfort any more.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go to Flint castle: there I’ll pine away;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A king, woe’s slave, shall kingly woe obey.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That power I have, discharge; and let them go</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To ear the land that hath some hope to grow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I have none: let no man speak again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To alter this, for counsel is but vain.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of Aumerle</td>
							<td>My liege, one word.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He does me double wrong</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Discharge my followers: let them hence away,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From Richard’s night to Bolingbroke’s fair day. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-3-3" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Wales. Before Flint castle.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter, with drum and colours, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</b>, Attendants, and forces.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So that by this intelligence we learn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Welshmen are dispersed, and Salisbury</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is gone to meet the king, who lately landed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With some few private friends upon this coast.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The news is very fair and good, my lord:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Richard not far from hence hath hid his head.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It would beseem the Lord Northumberland</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To say “King Richard:” alack the heavy day</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When such a sacred king should hide his head.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your grace mistakes; only to be brief</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Left I his title out.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The time hath been,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would you have been so brief with him, he would</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have been so brief with you, to shorten you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For taking so the head, your whole head’s length.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>Mistake not, uncle, further than you should.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Take not, good cousin, further than you should.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest you mistake the heavens are o’er our heads.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I know it, uncle, and oppose not myself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against their will. But who comes here?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Percy</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Welcome, Harry: what, will not this castle yield?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Percy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The castle royally is mann’d, my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against thy entrance.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Royally!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why, it contains no king?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Percy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes, my good lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It doth contain a king; King Richard lies</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within the limits of yon lime and stone:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with him are the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sir Stephen Scroop, besides a clergyman</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of holy reverence; who, I cannot learn.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td>O, belike it is the Bishop of Carlisle.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Noble lords,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go to the rude ribs of that ancient castle;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through brazen trumpet send the breath of parley</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into his ruin’d ears, and thus deliver:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Henry Bolingbroke</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On both his knees doth kiss King Richard’s hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sends allegiance and true faith of heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To his most royal person, hither come</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even at his feet to lay my arms and power,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Provided that my banishment repeal’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And lands restored again be freely granted:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If not, I’ll use the advantage of my power</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And lay the summer’s dust with showers of blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rain’d from the wounds of slaughter’d Englishmen:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The which, how far off from the mind of Bolingbroke</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is, such crimson tempest should bedrench</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The fresh green lap of fair King Richard’s land,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My stooping duty tenderly shall show.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go, signify as much, while here we march</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the grassy carpet of this plain.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let’s march without the noise of threatening drum,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That from this castle’s tatter’d battlements</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our fair appointments may be well perused.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Methinks King Richard and myself should meet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With no less terror than the elements</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of fire and water, when their thundering shock</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be he the fire, I’ll be the yielding water:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The rage be his, whilst on the earth I rain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My waters; on the earth, and not on him.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>March on, and mark King Richard how he looks.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Parle without, and answer within. Then a flourish. Enter on the walls, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></b>, the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Carlisle</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of Aumerle</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Stephen Scroop</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Earl of Salisbury</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>See, see, King Richard doth himself appear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As doth the blushing discontented sun</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From out the fiery portal of the east,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When he perceives the envious clouds are bent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To dim his glory and to stain the track</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of his bright passage to the occident.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yet looks he like a king: behold, his eye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As bright as is the eagle’s, lightens forth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Controlling majesty: alack, alack, for woe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That any harm should stain so fair a show!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We are amazed; and thus long have we stood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To watch the fearful bending of thy knee, <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because we thought ourself thy lawful king:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And if we be, how dare thy joints forget</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To pay their awful duty to our presence?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If we be not, show us the hand of God</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That hath dismissed us from our stewardship;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For well we know, no hand of blood and bone</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can gripe the sacred handle of our sceptre,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless he do profane, steal, or usurp.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And though you think that all, as you have done,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have torn their souls by turning them from us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we are barren and bereft of friends;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet know, my master, God omnipotent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is mustering in his clouds on our behalf</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Armies of pestilence; and they shall strike</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your children yet unborn and unbegot,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That lift your vassal hands against my head</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And threat the glory of my precious crown.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell Bolingbroke⁠—for yond methinks he stands⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That every stride he makes upon my land</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is dangerous treason: he is come to open</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The purple testament of bleeding war;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But ere the crown he looks for live in peace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ten thousand bloody crowns of mothers’ sons</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall ill become the flower of England’s face,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Change the complexion of her maid-pale peace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To scarlet indignation and bedew</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her pastures’ grass with faithful English blood.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The king of heaven forbid our lord the king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should so with civil and uncivil arms</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be rush’d upon! Thy thrice noble cousin</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Harry Bolingbroke doth humbly kiss thy hand;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And by the honourable tomb he swears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That stands upon your royal grandsire’s bones,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And by the royalties of both your bloods,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Currents that spring from one most gracious head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And by the buried hand of warlike Gaunt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And by the worth and honour of himself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Comprising all that may be sworn or said,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His coming hither hath no further scope</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than for his lineal royalties and to beg</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Enfranchisement immediate on his kn ees:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which on thy royal party granted once,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His glittering arms he will commend to rust,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His barbed steeds to stables, and his heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To faithful service of your majesty.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This swears he, as he is a prince, is just;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, as I am a gentleman, I credit him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Northumberland, say thus the king returns:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His noble cousin is right welcome hither;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all the number of his fair demands</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall be accomplish’d without contradiction:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With all the gracious utterance thou hast</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speak to his gentle hearing kind commends.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We do debase ourselves, cousin, do we not, <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of Aumerle</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>To look so poorly and to speak so fair?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall we call back Northumberland, and send</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Defiance to the traitor, and so die?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of Aumerle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, good my lord; let’s fight with gentle words</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till time lend friends and friends their helpful swords.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O God, O God! that e’er this tongue of mine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That laid the sentence of dread banishment</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On yon proud man, should take it off again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With words of sooth! O that I were as great</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As is my grief, or lesser than my name!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or that I could forget what I have been,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or not remember what I must be now!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Swell’st thou, proud heart? I’ll give thee scope to beat,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since foes have scope to beat both thee and me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of Aumerle</td>
							<td>Northumberland comes back from Bolingbroke.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What must the king do now? must he submit?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king shall do it: must he be deposed?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king shall be contented: must he lose</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The name of king? o’ God’s name, let it go:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll give my jewels for a set of beads,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My gorgeous palace for a hermitage,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My gay apparel for an almsman’s gown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My figured goblets for a dish of wood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My sceptre for a palmer’s walking staff,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My subjects for a pair of carved saints</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And my large kingdom for a little grave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A little little grave, an obscure grave;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or I’ll be buried in the king’s highway,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some way of common trade, where subjects’ feet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May hourly trample on their sovereign’s head;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For on my heart they tread now whilst I live;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And buried once, why not upon my head?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Aumerle, thou weep’st, my tender-hearted cousin!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’ll make foul weather with despised tears;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our sighs and they shall lodge the summer corn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make a dearth in this revolting land.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or shall we play the wantons with our woes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make some pretty match with shedding tears?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As thus, to drop them still upon one place,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till they have fretted us a pair of graves</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within the earth; and, therein laid⁠—there lies</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Two kinsmen digg’d their graves with weeping eyes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would not this ill do well? Well, well, I see</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I talk but idly, and you laugh at me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Most mighty prince, my Lord Northumberland,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What says King Bolingbroke? will his majesty</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give Richard leave to live till Richard die?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You make a leg, and Bolingbroke says ay.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, in the base court he doth attend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To speak with you; may it please you to come down.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Down, down I come; like glistering Phaethon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wanting the manage of unruly jades.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the base court? Base court, where kings grow base,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To come at traitors’ calls and do them grace.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the base court? Come down? Down, court!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>down, king!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For night-owls shriek where mounting larks</span>
									<br/>
									<span>should sing. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt from above.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>What says his majesty?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sorrow and grief of heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Makes him speak fondly, like a frantic man</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet he is come.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</b> and his attendants below.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Stand all apart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And show fair duty to his majesty. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He kneels down.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>My gracious lord⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fair cousin, you debase your princely knee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make the base earth proud with kissing it:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Me rather had my heart might feel your love</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than my unpleased eye see your courtesy.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Up, cousin, up; your heart is up, I know,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thus high at least, although your knee be low.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>My gracious lord, I come but for mine own.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td>Your own is yours, and I am yours, and all.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So far be mine, my most redoubted lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As my true service shall deserve your love.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well you deserve: they well deserve to have,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That know the strong’st and surest way to get.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Uncle, give me your hands: nay, dry your eyes;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tears show their love, but want their remedies.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cousin, I am too young to be your father,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though you are old enough to be my heir.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What you will have, I’ll give, and willing too;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For do we must what force will have us do.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Set on towards London, cousin, is it so?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Henry Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>Yea, my good lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></td>
							<td>Then I must not say no. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-3-4" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">LANGLEY</b>. The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York’s</b> garden.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</b> and two <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ladies</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What sport shall we devise here in this garden,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To drive away the heavy thought of care?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady</td>
							<td>Madam, we’ll play at bowls.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Twill make me think the world is full of rubs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that my fortune rubs against the bias.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady</td>
							<td>Madam, we’ll dance.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My legs can keep no measure in delight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When my poor heart no measure keeps in grief:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore, no dancing, girl; some other sport.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady</td>
							<td>Madam, we’ll tell tales.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td>Of sorrow or of joy?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady</td>
							<td>Of either, madam.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Of neither, girl:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For of joy, being altogether wanting,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It doth remember me the more of sorrow;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or if of grief, being altogether had,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It adds more sorrow to my want of joy:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For what I have I need not to repeat;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what I want it boots not to complain.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady</td>
							<td>Madam, I’ll sing.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis well that thou hast cause</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But thou shouldst please me better, wouldst thou weep.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady</td>
							<td>I could weep, madam, would it do you good.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And I could sing, would weeping do me good,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And never borrow any tear of thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gardener</b>, and two <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Servants</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But stay, here come the gardeners:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let’s step into the shadow of these trees.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My wretchedness unto a row of pins,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They’ll talk of state; for every one doth so</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against a change; woe is forerun with woe. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ladies</b> retire.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gardener</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go, bind thou up yon dangling apricocks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which, like unruly children, make their sire</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give some supportance to the bending twigs.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go thou, and like an executioner,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cut off the heads of too fast growing sprays,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That look too lofty in our commonwealth:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All must be even in our government.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You thus employ’d, I will go root away</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The noisome weeds, which without profit suck</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The soil’s fertility from wholesome flowers.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Servant</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why should we in the compass of a pale</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Keep law and form and due proportion,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Showing, as in a model, our firm estate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When our sea-walled garden, the whole land,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is full of weeds, her fairest flowers choked up,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her fruit-trees all upturned, her hedges ruin’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her knots disorder’d and her wholesome herbs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Swarming with caterpillars?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gardener</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hold thy peace:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He that hath suffer’d this disorder’d spring</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath now himself met with the fall of leaf:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The weeds which his broad-spreading leaves did shelter,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That seem’d in eating him to hold him up,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are pluck’d up root and all by Bolingbroke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I mean the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, Green.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Servant</td>
							<td>What, are they dead?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gardener</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>They are; and Bolingbroke</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath seized the wasteful king. O, what pity is it</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That he had not so trimm’d and dress’d his land</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As we this garden! We at time of year</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do wound the bark, the skin of our fruit-trees,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest, being over-proud in sap and blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With too much riches it confound itself:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had he done so to great and growing men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They might have lived to bear and he to taste</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their fruits of duty: superfluous branches</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We lop away, that bearing boughs may live:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had he done so, himself had borne the crown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which waste of idle hours hath quite thrown down.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Servant</td>
							<td>What, think you then the king shall be deposed?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gardener</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Depress’d he is already, and deposed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis doubt he will be: letters came last night</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To a dear friend of the good Duke of York’s,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That tell black tidings.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, I am press’d to death through want of speaking! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Coming forward.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou, old Adam’s likeness, set to dress this garden,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this unpleasing news?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What Eve, what serpent, hath suggested thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make a second fall of cursed man?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why dost thou say King Richard is deposed?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Darest thou, thou little better thing than earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Divine his downfall? Say, where, when, and how,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Camest thou by this ill tidings? speak, thou wretch.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gardener</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Pardon me, madam: little joy have I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To breathe this news; yet what I say is true.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>King Richard, he is in the mighty hold</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Bolingbroke: their fortunes both are weigh’d:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In your lord’s scale is nothing but himself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And some few vanities that make him light;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But in the balance of great Bolingbroke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Besides himself, are all the English peers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with that odds he weighs King Richard down.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Post you to London, and you will find it so;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I speak no more than every one doth know.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nimble mischance, that art so light of foot,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth not thy embassage belong to me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And am I last that knows it? O, thou think’st</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To serve me last, that I may longest keep</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy sorrow in my breast. Come, ladies, go,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To meet at London London’s king in woe.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What, was I born to this, that my sad look</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should grace the triumph of great Bolingbroke?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gardener, for telling me these news of woe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pray God the plants thou graft’st may never grow. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ladies</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gardener</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Poor queen! so that thy state might be no worse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would my skill were subject to thy curse.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here did she fall a tear; here in this place</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll set a bank of rue, sour herb of grace:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rue, even for ruth, here shortly shall be seen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the remembrance of a weeping queen. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
