<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-1-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>London. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II’s</b> palace.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</b>, with other Nobles and Attendants.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Old John of Gaunt, time-honour’d Lancaster,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hast thou, according to thy oath and band,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Brought hither Henry Hereford thy bold son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here to make good the boisterous late appeal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which then our leisure would not let us hear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</td>
							<td>I have, my liege.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tell me, moreover, hast thou sounded him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If he appeal the duke on ancient malice;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or worthily, as a good subject should,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On some known ground of treachery in him?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As near as I could sift him on that argument,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On some apparent danger seen in him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Aim’d at your highness, no inveterate malice.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then call them to our presence; face to face,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And frowning brow to brow, ourselves will hear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The accuser and the accused freely speak:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>High-stomach’d are they both, and full of ire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In rage deaf as the sea, hasty as fire.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">THOMAS MOWBRAY</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Many years of happy days befal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My gracious sovereign, my most loving liege!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">THOMAS MOWBRAY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Each day still better other’s happiness;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Until the heavens, envying earth’s good hap,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Add an immortal title to your crown!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We thank you both: yet one but flatters us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As well appeareth by the cause you come;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Namely to appeal each other of high treason.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cousin of Hereford, what dost thou object</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>First, heaven be the record to my speech!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the devotion of a subject’s love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tendering the precious safety of my prince,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And free from other misbegotten hate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come I appellant to this princely presence.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, Thomas Mowbray, do I turn to thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And mark my greeting well; for what I speak</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My body shall make good upon this earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or my divine soul answer it in heaven.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou art a traitor and a miscreant,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Too good to be so and too bad to live,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since the more fair and crystal is the sky,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The uglier seem the clouds that in it fly.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Once more, the more to aggravate the note,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With a foul traitor’s name stuff I thy throat;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wish, so please my sovereign, ere I move,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What my tongue speaks my right drawn sword may prove.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">THOMAS MOWBRAY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let not my cold words here accuse my zeal:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis not the trial of a woman’s war,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The bitter clamour of two eager tongues,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can arbitrate this cause betwixt us twain;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The blood is hot that must be cool’d for this:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet can I not of such tame patience boast</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As to be hush’d and nought at all to say:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First, the fair reverence of your highness curbs me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From giving reins and spurs to my free speech;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which else would post until it had return’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These terms of treason doubled down his throat.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Setting aside his high blood’s royalty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let him be no kinsman to my liege,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do defy him, and I spit at him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Call him a slanderous coward and a villain:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which to maintain I would allow him odds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And meet him, were I tied to run afoot</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even to the frozen ridges of the Alps,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or any other ground inhabitable,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where ever Englishman durst set his foot.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mean time let this defend my loyalty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By all my hopes, most falsely doth he lie.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Pale trembling coward, there I throw my gage,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Disclaiming here the kindred of the king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And lay aside my high blood’s royalty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which fear, not reverence, makes thee to except.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If guilty dread have left thee so much strength</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As to take up mine honour’s pawn, then stoop:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By that and all the rites of knighthood else,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will I make good against thee, arm to arm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What I have spoke, or thou canst worse devise.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">THOMAS MOWBRAY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I take it up; and by that sword I swear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which gently laid my knighthood on my shoulder,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll answer thee in any fair degree,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or chivalrous design of knightly trial:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when I mount, alive may I not light,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I be traitor or unjustly fight!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What doth our cousin lay to Mowbray’s charge?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It must be great that can inherit us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So much as of a thought of ill in him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Look, what I speak, my life shall prove it true;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Mowbray hath received eight thousand nobles</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In name of lendings for your highness’ soldiers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The which he hath detain’d for lewd employments,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like a false traitor and injurious villain.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Besides I say and will in battle prove,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or here or elsewhere to the furthest verge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That ever was survey’d by English eye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That all the treasons for these eighteen years</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Complotted and contrived in this land</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fetch from false Mowbray their first head and spring.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Further I say and further will maintain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon his bad life to make all this good,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That he did plot the Duke of Gloucester’s death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Suggest his soon-believing adversaries,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And consequently, like a traitor coward,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sluiced out his innocent soul through streams of blood:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which blood, like sacrificing Abel’s, cries,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even from the tongueless caverns of the earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To me for justice and rough chastisement;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, by the glorious worth of my descent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This arm shall do it, or this life be spent.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How high a pitch his resolution soars!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thomas of Norfolk, what say’st thou to this?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">THOMAS MOWBRAY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, let my sovereign turn away his face</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bid his ears a little while be deaf,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till I have told this slander of his blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How God and good men hate so foul a liar.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Mowbray, impartial are our eyes and ears:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were he my brother, nay, my kingdom’s heir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As he is but my father’s brother’s son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, by my sceptre’s awe, I make a vow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such neighbour nearness to our sacred blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should nothing privilege him, nor partialize</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The unstooping firmness of my upright soul:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He is our subject, Mowbray; so art thou:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Free speech and fearless I to thee allow.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">THOMAS MOWBRAY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then, Bolingbroke, as low as to thy heart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through the false passage of thy throat, thou liest.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Three parts of that receipt I had for Calais</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Disbursed I duly to his highness’ soldiers;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The other part reserved I by consent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For that my sovereign liege was in my debt</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon remainder of a dear account,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since last I went to France to fetch his queen:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now swallow down that lie. For Gloucester’s death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I slew him not; but to my own disgrace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Neglected my sworn duty in that case.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For you, my noble Lord of Lancaster,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The honourable father to my foe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Once did I lay an ambush for your life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A trespass that doth vex my grieved soul</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But ere I last received the sacrament</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I did confess it, and exactly begg’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your grace’s pardon, and I hope I had it.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This is my fault: as for the rest appeall’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It issues from the rancour of a villain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A recreant and most degenerate traitor</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which in myself I boldly will defend;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And interchangeably hurl down my gage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon this overweening traitor’s foot,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To prove myself a loyal gentleman</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even in the best blood chamber’d in his bosom.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In haste whereof, most heartily I pray</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your highness to assign our trial day.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Wrath-kindled gentlemen, be ruled by me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let’s purge this choler without letting blood:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This we prescribe, though no physician;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Deep malice makes too deep incision;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forget, forgive; conclude and be agreed;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our doctors say this is no month to bleed.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Good uncle, let this end where it begun;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’ll calm the Duke of Norfolk, you your son.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To be a make-peace shall become my age:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Throw down, my son, the Duke of Norfolk’s gage.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td>And, Norfolk, throw down his.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>When, Harry, when?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Obedience bids I should not bid again.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td>Norfolk, throw down, we bid; there is no boot.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">THOMAS MOWBRAY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Myself I throw, dread sovereign, at thy foot.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My life thou shalt command, but not my shame:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The one my duty owes; but my fair name,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Despite of death that lives upon my grave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To dark dishonour’s use thou shalt not have.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am disgraced, impeach’d and baffled here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pierced to the soul with slander’s venom’d spear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The which no balm can cure but his heart-blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which breathed this poison.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Rage must be withstood:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give me his gage: lions make leopards tame.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">THOMAS MOWBRAY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yea, but not change his spots: take but my shame.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I resign my gage. My dear dear lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The purest treasure mortal times afford</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is spotless reputation: that away,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Men are but gilded loam or painted clay.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A jewel in a ten-times-barr’d-up chest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is a bold spirit in a loyal breast.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mine honour is my life; both grow in one:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take honour from me, and my life is done:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then, dear my liege, mine honour let me try;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In that I live and for that will I die.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td>Cousin, throw up your gage; do you begin.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, God defend my soul from such deep sin!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall I seem crest-fall’n in my father’s sight?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or with pale beggar-fear impeach my height</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before this out-dared dastard? Ere my tongue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall wound my honour with such feeble wrong,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or sound so base a parle, my teeth shall tear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The slavish motive of recanting fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And spit it bleeding in his high disgrace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where shame doth harbour, even in Mowbray’s face. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We were not born to sue, but to command;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which since we cannot do to make you friends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be ready, as your lives shall answer it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At Coventry, upon Saint Lambert’s day:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There shall your swords and lances arbitrate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The swelling difference of your settled hate:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since we can not atone you, we shall see</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Justice design the victor’s chivalry.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lord marshal, command our officers at arms</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be ready to direct these home alarms. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">DUKE OF LANCASTER’S</b> palace.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</b> with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">DUCHESS</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Alas, the part I had in Woodstock’s blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth more solicit me than your exclaims,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To stir against the butchers of his life!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But since correction lieth in those hands</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which made the fault that we cannot correct,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Put we our quarrel to the will of heaven;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, when they see the hours ripe on earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will rain hot vengeance on offenders’ heads.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">DUCHESS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath love in thy old blood no living fire?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Edward’s seven sons, whereof thyself art one,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were as seven vials of his sacred blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or seven fair branches springing from one root:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some of those seven are dried by nature’s course,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some of those branches by the Destinies cut;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But Thomas, my dear lord, my life, my Gloucester,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One vial full of Edward’s sacred blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One flourishing branch of his most royal root,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is crack’d, and all the precious liquor spilt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is hack’d down, and his summer leaves all faded,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By envy’s hand and murder’s bloody axe.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, Gaunt, his blood was thine! that bed, that womb,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That metal, that self-mould, that fashion’d thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Made him a man; and though thou livest and breathest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet art thou slain in him: thou dost consent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In some large measure to thy father’s death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In that thou seest thy wretched brother die,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who was the model of thy father’s life.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Call it not patience, Gaunt; it is despair:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In suffering thus thy brother to be slaughter’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou showest the naked pathway to thy life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Teaching stern murder how to butcher thee:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That which in mean men we intitle patience</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is pale cold cowardice in noble breasts.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What shall I say? to safeguard thine own life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The best way is to venge my Gloucester’s death.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>God’s is the quarrel; for God’s substitute,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His deputy anointed in His sight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath caused his death: the which if wrongfully,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let heaven revenge; for I may never lift</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An angry arm against His minister.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">DUCHESS</td>
							<td>Where then, alas, may I complain myself?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</td>
							<td>To God, the widow’s champion and defence.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">DUCHESS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, then, I will. Farewell, old Gaunt.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou goest to Coventry, there to behold</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our cousin Hereford and fell Mowbray fight:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, sit my husband’s wrongs on Hereford’s spear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That it may enter butcher Mowbray’s breast!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or, if misfortune miss the first career,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be Mowbray’s sins so heavy in his bosom,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They may break his foaming courser’s back,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And throw the rider headlong in the lists,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A caitiff recreant to my cousin Hereford!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Farewell, old Gaunt: thy sometimes brother’s wife</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With her companion grief must end her life.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sister, farewell; I must to Coventry:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As much good stay with thee as go with me!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">DUCHESS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yet one word more: grief boundeth where it falls,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not with the empty hollowness, but weight:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I take my leave before I have begun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For sorrow ends not when it seemeth done.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commend me to thy brother, Edmund York.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lo, this is all:⁠—nay, yet depart not so;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though this be all, do not so quickly go;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I shall remember more. Bid him⁠—ah, what?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With all good speed at Plashy visit me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alack, and what shall good old York there see</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But empty lodgings and unfurnish’d walls,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unpeopled offices, untrodden stones?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what hear there for welcome but my groans?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore commend me; let him not come there,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To seek out sorrow that dwells every where.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Desolate, desolate, will I hence and die:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The last leave of thee takes my weeping eye. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-3" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The lists at Coventry.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the Lord Marshal and the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">DUKE OF AUMERLE</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Marshal</td>
							<td>My Lord Aumerle, is Harry Hereford arm’d?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">DUKE OF AUMERLE</td>
							<td>Yea, at all points; and longs to enter in.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Marshal</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The Duke of Norfolk, sprightfully and bold,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stays but the summons of the appellant’s trumpet.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">DUKE OF AUMERLE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, then, the champions are prepared, and stay</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For nothing but his majesty’s approach.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The trumpets sound, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD</b> enters with his nobles, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">BUSHY</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">BAGOT</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">GREEN</b>, and others. When they are set, enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">THOMAS MOWBRAY</b> in arms, defendant, with a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Herald</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Marshal, demand of yonder champion</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The cause of his arrival here in arms:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ask him his name and orderly proceed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To swear him in the justice of his cause.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Marshal</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In God’s name and the king’s, say who thou art</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And why thou comest thus knightly clad in arms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against what man thou comest, and what thy quarrel:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speak truly, on thy knighthood and thy oath;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As so defend thee heaven and thy valour!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">THOMAS MOWBRAY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My name is Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who hither come engaged by my oath⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which God defend a knight should violate!⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both to defend my loyalty and truth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To God, my king and my succeeding issue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against the Duke of Hereford that appeals me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, by the grace of God and this mine arm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To prove him, in defending of myself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A traitor to my God, my king, and me:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The trumpets sound. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</b>, appellant, in armour, with a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Herald</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Marshal, ask yonder knight in arms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both who he is and why he cometh hither</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thus plated in habiliments of war,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And formally, according to our law,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Depose him in the justice of his cause.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Marshal</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What is thy name? and wherefore comest thou hither,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before King Richard in his royal lists?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against whom comest thou? and what’s thy quarrel?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speak like a true knight, so defend thee heaven!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Am I; who ready here do stand in arms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To prove, by God’s grace and my body’s valour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In lists, on Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That he is a traitor, foul and dangerous,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To God of heaven, King Richard and to me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Marshal</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>On pain of death, no person be so bold</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or daring-hardy as to touch the lists,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Except the marshal and such officers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Appointed to direct these fair designs.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Lord marshal, let me kiss my sovereign’s hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bow my knee before his majesty:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For Mowbray and myself are like two men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That vow a long and weary pilgrimage;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then let us take a ceremonious leave</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And loving farewell of our several friends.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Marshal</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The appellant in all duty greets your highness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And craves to kiss your hand and take his leave.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We will descend and fold him in our arms.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cousin of Hereford, as thy cause is right,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So be thy fortune in this royal fight!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Farewell, my blood; which if to-day thou shed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lament we may, but not revenge thee dead.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O let no noble eye profane a tear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For me, if I be gored with Mowbray’s spear:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As confident as is the falcon’s flight</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against a bird, do I with Mowbray fight.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My loving lord, I take my leave of you;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of you, my noble cousin, Lord Aumerle;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not sick, although I have to do with death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But lusty, young, and cheerly drawing breath.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lo, as at English feasts, so I regreet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The daintiest last, to make the end most sweet:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O thou, the earthly author of my blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose youthful spirit, in me regenerate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth with a twofold vigour lift me up</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To reach at victory above my head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Add proof unto mine armour with thy prayers;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with thy blessings steel my lance’s point,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That it may enter Mowbray’s waxen coat,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And furbish new the name of John a Gaunt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even in the lusty havior of his son.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>God in thy good cause make thee prosperous!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be swift like lightning in the execution;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let thy blows, doubly redoubled,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fall like amazing thunder on the casque</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of thy adverse pernicious enemy:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rouse up thy youthful blood, be valiant and live.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</td>
							<td>Mine innocency and Saint George to thrive!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">THOMAS MOWBRAY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>However God or fortune cast my lot,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There lives or dies, true to King Richard’s throne,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A loyal, just and upright gentleman:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Never did captive with a freer heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cast off his chains of bondage and embrace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His golden uncontroll’d enfranchisement,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More than my dancing soul doth celebrate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This feast of battle with mine adversary.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Most mighty liege, and my companion peers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take from my mouth the wish of happy years:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As gentle and as jocund as to jest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go I to fight: truth hath a quiet breast.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Farewell, my lord: securely I espy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Virtue with valour couched in thine eye.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Order the trial, marshal, and begin.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Marshal</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Receive thy lance; and God defend the right!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</td>
							<td>Strong as a tower in hope, I cry amen.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Marshal</td>
							<td>Go bear this lance to Thomas, Duke of Norfolk.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Herald</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stands here for God, his sovereign and himself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On pain to be found false and recreant,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To prove the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A traitor to his God, his king and him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And dares him to set forward to the fight.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Herald</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Here standeth Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On pain to be found false and recreant,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both to defend himself and to approve</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Henry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To God, his sovereign and to him disloyal;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Courageously and with a free desire</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Attending but the signal to begin.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Marshal</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sound, trumpets; and set forward, combatants. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A charge sounded.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stay, the king hath thrown his warder down.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let them lay by their helmets and their spears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And both return back to their chairs again:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Withdraw with us: and let the trumpets sound</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While we return these dukes what we decree. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A long flourish.</i> Draw near,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And list what with our council we have done.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For that our kingdom’s earth should not be soil’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With that dear blood which it hath fostered;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And for our eyes do hate the dire aspect</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of civil wounds plough’d up with neighbours’ sword;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And for we think the eagle-winged pride</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of sky-aspiring and ambitious thoughts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With rival-hating envy, set on you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To wake our peace, which in our country’s cradle</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Draws the sweet infant breath of gentle sleep;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which so roused up with boisterous untuned drums,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With harsh resounding trumpets’ dreadful bray,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And grating shock of wrathful iron arms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Might from our quiet confines fright fair peace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make us wade even in our kindred’s blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore, we banish you our territories:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You, cousin Hereford, upon pain of life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till twice five summers have enrich’d our fields</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall not regreet our fair dominions,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But tread the stranger paths of banishment.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your will be done: this must my comfort be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sun that warms you here shall shine on me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And those his golden beams to you here lent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall point on me and gild my banishment.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Norfolk, for thee remains a heavier doom,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which I with some unwillingness pronounce:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sly slow hours shall not determinate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The dateless limit of thy dear exile;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The hopeless word of ‘never to return’</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Breathe I against thee, upon pain of life.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">THOMAS MOWBRAY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A heavy sentence, my most sovereign liege,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all unlook’d for from your highness’ mouth:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A dearer merit, not so deep a maim</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As to be cast forth in the common air,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have I deserved at your highness’ hands.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The language I have learn’d these forty years,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My native English, now I must forego:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now my tongue’s use is to me no more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than an unstringed viol or a harp,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or like a cunning instrument cased up,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or, being open, put into his hands</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That knows no touch to tune the harmony:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within my mouth you have engaol’d my tongue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doubly portcullis’d with my teeth and lips;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And dull unfeeling barren ignorance</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is made my gaoler to attend on me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am too old to fawn upon a nurse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Too far in years to be a pupil now:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What is thy sentence then but speechless death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which robs my tongue from breathing native breath?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It boots thee not to be compassionate:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>After our sentence plaining comes too late.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">THOMAS MOWBRAY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then thus I turn me from my country’s light,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To dwell in solemn shades of endless night.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Return again, and take an oath with thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lay on our royal sword your banish’d hands;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Swear by the duty that you owe to God⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our part therein we banish with yourselves⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To keep the oath that we administer:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You never shall, so help you truth and God!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Embrace each other’s love in banishment;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor never look upon each other’s face;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor never write, regreet, nor reconcile</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This louring tempest of your home-bred hate;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor never by advised purpose meet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To plot, contrive, or complot any ill</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Gainst us, our state, our subjects, or our land.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</td>
							<td>I swear.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">THOMAS MOWBRAY</td>
							<td>And I, to keep all this.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Norfolk, so far as to mine enemy:⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By this time, had the king permitted us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One of our souls had wander’d in the air.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Banish’d this frail sepulchre of our flesh,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As now our flesh is banish’d from this land:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Confess thy treasons ere thou fly the realm;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since thou hast far to go, bear not along</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The clogging burthen of a guilty soul.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">THOMAS MOWBRAY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, Bolingbroke: if ever I were traitor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My name be blotted from the book of life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I from heaven banish’d as from hence!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But what thou art, God, thou, and I do know;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all too soon, I fear, the king shall rue.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Farewell, my liege. Now no way can I stray;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Save back to England, all the world’s my way. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I see thy grieved heart: thy sad aspect</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath from the number of his banish’d years</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pluck’d four away. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</b>.</i> Six frozen winter spent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Return with welcome home from banishment.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How long a time lies in one little word!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Four lagging winters and four wanton springs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>End in a word: such is the breath of kings.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I thank my liege, that in regard of me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He shortens four years of my son’s exile:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But little vantage shall I reap thereby;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, ere the six years that he hath to spend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can change their moons and bring their times about</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My oil-dried lamp and time-bewasted light</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall be extinct with age and endless night;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My inch of taper will be burnt and done,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And blindfold death not let me see my son.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td>Why uncle, thou hast many years to live.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But not a minute, king, that thou canst give:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shorten my days thou canst with sullen sorrow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou canst help time to furrow me with age,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy word is current with him for my death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thy son is banish’d upon good advice,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whereto thy tongue a party-verdict gave:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why at our justice seem’st thou then to lour?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You urged me as a judge; but I had rather</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You would have bid me argue like a father.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, had it been a stranger, not my child,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To smooth his fault I should have been more mild:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A partial slander sought I to avoid,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in the sentence my own life destroy’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alas, I look’d when some of you should say,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I was too strict to make mine own away;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But you gave leave to my unwilling tongue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against my will to do myself this wrong.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Cousin, farewell; and, uncle, bid him so:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Six years we banish him, and he shall go. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</b> and train.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">DUKE OF AUMERLE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Cousin, farewell: what presence must not know,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From where you do remain let paper show.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Marshal</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, no leave take I; for I will ride,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As far as land will let me, by your side.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, to what purpose dost thou hoard thy words,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou return’st no greeting to thy friends?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I have too few to take my leave of you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When the tongue’s office should be prodigal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To breathe the abundant dolour of the heart.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</td>
							<td>Thy grief is but thy absence for a time.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</td>
							<td>Joy absent, grief is present for that time.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</td>
							<td>What is six winters? they are quickly gone.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</td>
							<td>To men in joy; but grief makes one hour ten.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</td>
							<td>Call it a travel that thou takest for pleasure.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My heart will sigh when I miscall it so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which finds it an inforced pilgrimage.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The sullen passage of thy weary steps</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Esteem as foil wherein thou art to set</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The precious jewel of thy home return.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, rather, every tedious stride I make</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will but remember me what a deal of world</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I wander from the jewels that I love.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must I not serve a long apprenticehood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To foreign passages, and in the end,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Having my freedom, boast of nothing else</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that I was a journeyman to grief?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>All places that the eye of heaven visits</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are to a wise man ports and happy havens.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Teach thy necessity to reason thus;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is no virtue like necessity.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Think not the king did banish thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But thou the king. Woe doth the heavier sit,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where it perceives it is but faintly borne.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go, say I sent thee forth to purchase honour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And not the king exiled thee; or suppose</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Devouring pestilence hangs in our air</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou art flying to a fresher clime:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Look, what thy soul holds dear, imagine it</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To lie that way thou go’st, not whence thou comest:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Suppose the singing birds musicians,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The grass whereon thou tread’st the presence strew’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The flowers fair ladies, and thy steps no more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than a delightful measure or a dance;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For gnarling sorrow hath less power to bite</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The man that mocks at it and sets it light.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, who can hold a fire in his hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By thinking on the frosty Caucasus?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or cloy the hungry edge of appetite</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By bare imagination of a feast?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or wallow naked in December snow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By thinking on fantastic summer’s heat?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, no! the apprehension of the good</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gives but the greater feeling to the worse:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fell sorrow’s tooth doth never rankle more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than when he bites, but lanceth not the sore.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">JOHN OF GAUNT</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come, come, my son, I’ll bring thee on thy way:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had I thy youth and cause, I would not stay.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HENRY BOLINGBROKE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then, England’s ground, farewell; sweet soil, adieu;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My mother, and my nurse, that bears me yet!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where’er I wander, boast of this I can,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though banish’d, yet a trueborn Englishman. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-4" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The court.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</b>, with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">BAGOT</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">GREEN</b> at one door; and the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">DUKE OF AUMERLE</b> at another.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We did observe. Cousin Aumerle,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How far brought you high Hereford on his way?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">DUKE OF AUMERLE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I brought high Hereford, if you call him so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But to the next highway, and there I left him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td>And say, what store of parting tears were shed?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">DUKE OF AUMERLE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Faith, none for me; except the north-east wind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which then blew bitterly against our faces,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Awaked the sleeping rheum, and so by chance</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did grace our hollow parting with a tear.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td>What said our cousin when you parted with him?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">DUKE OF AUMERLE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>‘Farewell:’</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, for my heart disdained that my tongue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should so profane the word, that taught me craft</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To counterfeit oppression of such grief</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That words seem’d buried in my sorrow’s grave.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Marry, would the word ‘farewell’ have lengthen’d hours</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And added years to his short banishment,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He should have had a volume of farewells;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But since it would not, he had none of me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He is our cousin, cousin; but ’tis doubt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When time shall call him home from banishment,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whether our kinsman come to see his friends.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ourself and Bushy, Bagot here and Green</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Observed his courtship to the common people;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How he did seem to dive into their hearts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With humble and familiar courtesy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What reverence he did throw away on slaves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And patient underbearing of his fortune,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As ’twere to banish their affects with him.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Off goes his bonnet to an oyster-wench;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A brace of draymen bid God speed him well</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And had the tribute of his supple knee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With ‘Thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends;’</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As were our England in reversion his,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he our subjects’ next degree in hope.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">GREEN</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well, he is gone; and with him go these thoughts.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now for the rebels which stand out in Ireland,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Expedient manage must be made, my liege,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ere further leisure yield them further means</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For their advantage and your highness’ loss.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We will ourself in person to this war:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, for our coffers, with too great a court</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And liberal largess, are grown somewhat light,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We are inforced to farm our royal realm;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The revenue whereof shall furnish us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For our affairs in hand: if that come short,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our substitutes at home shall have blank charters;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whereto, when they shall know what men are rich,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They shall subscribe them for large sums of gold</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And send them after to supply our wants;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For we will make for Ireland presently.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">BUSHY</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Bushy, what news?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BUSHY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Old John of Gaunt is grievous sick, my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Suddenly taken; and hath sent post haste</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To entreat your majesty to visit him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td>Where lies he?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BUSHY</td>
							<td>At Ely House.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING RICHARD II</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now put it, God, in the physician’s mind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To help him to his grave immediately!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The lining of his coffers shall make coats</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To deck our soldiers for these Irish wars.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, gentlemen, let’s all go visit him:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pray God we may make haste, and come too late!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
							<td>Amen. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
