<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-5-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>London. A street leading to the Tower.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ladies</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This way the king will come; this is the way</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Julius Caesar’s ill-erected tower,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To whose flint bosom my condemned lord</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is doom’d a prisoner by proud Bolingbroke:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here let us rest, if this rebellious earth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have any resting for her true king’s queen.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</b> and Guard.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But soft, but see, or rather do not see,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My fair rose wither: yet look up, behold,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That you in pity may dissolve to dew,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wash him fresh again with true-love tears.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, thou, the model where old Troy did stand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou map of honour, thou King Richard’s tomb,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And not King Richard; thou most beauteous inn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why should hard-favour’d grief be lodged in thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When triumph is become an alehouse guest?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Join not with grief, fair woman, do not so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make my end too sudden: learn, good soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To think our former state a happy dream;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From which awaked, the truth of what we are</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shows us but this: I am sworn brother, sweet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To grim Necessity, and he and I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will keep a league till death. Hie thee to France</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And cloister thee in some religious house:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our holy lives must win a new world’s crown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which our profane hours here have stricken down.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What, is my Richard both in shape and mind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Transform’d and weaken’d? hath Bolingbroke deposed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thine intellect? hath he been in thy heart?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The lion dying thrusteth forth his paw,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wounds the earth, if nothing else, with rage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be o’erpower’d; and wilt thou, pupil-like,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take thy correction mildly, kiss the rod,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fawn on rage with base humility,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which art a lion and a king of beasts?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A king of beasts, indeed; if aught but beasts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I had been still a happy king of men.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Good sometime queen, prepare thee hence for France:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Think I am dead and that even here thou takest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As from my death-bed, thy last living leave.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In winter’s tedious nights sit by the fire</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With good old folks and let them tell thee tales</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of woeful ages long ago betid;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ere thou bid good night, to quit their griefs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell thou the lamentable tale of me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And send the hearers weeping to their beds:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For why the senseless brands will sympathize</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The heavy accent of thy moving tongue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in compassion weep the fire out;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And some will mourn in ashes, some coal-black,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For the deposing of a rightful king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</b> and others.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, the mind of Bolingbroke is changed;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You must to Pomfret, not unto the Tower.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, madam, there is order ta’en for you;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With all swift speed you must away to France.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Northumberland, thou ladder wherewithal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The mounting Bolingbroke ascends my throne,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The time shall not be many hours of age</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More than it is ere foul sin gathering head</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shalt break into corruption: thou shalt think,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though he divide the realm and give thee half,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is too little, helping him to all;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he shall think that thou, which know’st the way</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To plant unrightful kings, wilt know again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being ne’er so little urged, another way</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To pluck him headlong from the usurped throne.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The love of wicked men converts to fear;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That fear to hate, and hate turns one or both</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To worthy danger and deserved death.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My guilt be on my head, and there an end.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take leave and part; for you must part forthwith.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Doubly divorced! Bad men, you violate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A twofold marriage, ’twixt my crown and me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then betwixt me and my married wife.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let me unkiss the oath ’twixt thee and me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet not so, for with a kiss ’twas made.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Part us, Northumberland; I toward the north,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where shivering cold and sickness pines the clime;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My wife to France: from whence, set forth in pomp,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She came adorned hither like sweet May,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sent back like Hallowmas or short’st of day.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td>And must we be divided? must we part?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td>Ay, hand from hand, my love, and heart from heart.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td>Banish us both and send the king with me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td>That were some love but little policy.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td>Then whither he goes, thither let me go.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So two, together weeping, make one woe.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Weep thou for me in France, I for thee here;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Better far off than near, be ne’er the near.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go, count thy way with sighs; I mine with groans.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td>So longest way shall have the longest moans.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Twice for one step I’ll groan, the way being short,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And piece the way out with a heavy heart.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, come, in wooing sorrow let’s be brief,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since, wedding it, there is such length in grief:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One kiss shall stop our mouths, and dumbly part;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thus give I mine, and thus take I thy heart.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Give me mine own again; ’twere no good part</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To take on me to keep and kill thy heart.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So, now I have mine own again, be gone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I might strive to kill it with a groan.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We make woe wanton with this fond delay:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Once more, adieu; the rest let sorrow say. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of York’s</b> palace.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">York</b> and his <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, you told me you would tell the rest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When weeping made you break the story off,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>of our two cousins coming into London.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td>Where did I leave?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>At that sad stop, my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where rude misgovern’d hands from windows’ tops</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Threw dust and rubbish on King Richard’s head.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then, as I said, the duke, great Bolingbroke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mounted upon a hot and fiery steed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which his aspiring rider seem’d to know,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With slow but stately pace kept on his course,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whilst all tongues cried “God save thee, Bolingbroke!”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You would have thought the very windows spake,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So many greedy looks of young and old</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through casements darted their desiring eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon his visage, and that all the walls</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With painted imagery had said at once</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Jesu preserve thee! welcome, Bolingbroke!”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whilst he, from the one side to the other turning,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bareheaded, lower than his proud steed’s neck,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bespake them thus; “I thank you, countrymen:”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thus still doing, thus he pass’d along.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td>Alack, poor Richard! where rode he the whilst?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As in a theatre, the eyes of men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>After a well-graced actor leaves the stage,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are idly bent on him that enters next,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thinking his prattle to be tedious;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even so, or with much more contempt, men’s eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did scowl on gentle Richard; no man cried “God save him!”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But dust was thrown upon his sacred head;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His face still combating with tears and smiles,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The badges of his grief and patience,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That had not God, for some strong purpose, steel’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And barbarism itself have pitied him.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But heaven hath a hand in these events,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To whose high will we bound our calm contents.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Bolingbroke are we sworn subjects now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose state and honour I for aye allow.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td>Here comes my son Aumerle.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Aumerle that was;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that is lost for being Richard’s friend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, madam, you must call him Rutland now:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am in parliament pledge for his truth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And lasting fealty to the new-made king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Welcome, my son: who are the violets now</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That strew the green lap of the new come spring?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Madam, I know not, nor I greatly care not:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>God knows I had as lief be none as one.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well, bear you well in this new spring of time,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest you be cropp’d before you come to prime.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What news from Oxford? hold those justs and triumphs?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td>For aught I know, my lord, they do.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td>You will be there, I know.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td>If God prevent not, I purpose so.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What seal is that, that hangs without thy bosom?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, look’st thou pale? let me see the writing.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td>My lord, ’tis nothing.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No matter, then, who see it:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will be satisfied; let me see the writing.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I do beseech your grace to pardon me:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is a matter of small consequence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which for some reasons I would not have seen.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Which for some reasons, sir, I mean to see.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I fear, I fear⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What should you fear?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis nothing but some bond, that he is enter’d into</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For gay apparel ’gainst the triumph day.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Bound to himself! what doth he with a bond</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That he is bound to? Wife, thou art a fool.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Boy, let me see the writing.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td>I do beseech you, pardon me; I may not show it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I will be satisfied; let me see it, I say. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He plucks it out of his bosom and reads it.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Treason! foul treason! Villain! traitor! slave!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td>What is the matter, my lord?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td>Ho! who is within there?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Servant</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Saddle my horse.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>God for his mercy, what treachery is here!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td>Why, what is it, my lord?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Give me my boots, I say; saddle my horse. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Servant</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, by mine honour, by my life, by my troth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will appeach the villain.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td>What is the matter?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td>Peace, foolish woman.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td>I will not peace. What is the matter, Aumerle?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Good mother, be content; it is no more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than my poor life must answer.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td>Thy life answer!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td>Bring me my boots: I will unto the king.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Servant</b> with boots.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Strike him, Aumerle. Poor boy, thou art amazed.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hence, villain! never more come in my sight.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td>Give me my boots, I say.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, York, what wilt thou do?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have we more sons? or are we like to have?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is not my teeming date drunk up with time?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wilt thou pluck my fair son from mine age,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And rob me of a happy mother’s name?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is he not like thee? is he not thine own?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou fond mad woman,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wilt thou conceal this dark conspiracy?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A dozen of them here have ta’en the sacrament,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And interchangeably set down their hands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To kill the king at Oxford.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He shall be none;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’ll keep him here: then what is that to him?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Away, fond woman! were he twenty times my son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would appeach him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hadst thou groan’d for him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I have done, thou wouldst be more pitiful.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But now I know thy mind; thou dost suspect</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I have been disloyal to thy bed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that he is a bastard, not thy son:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sweet York, sweet husband, be not of that mind:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He is as like thee as a man may be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not like to me, or any of my kin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet I love him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td>Make way, unruly woman! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>After, Aumerle! mount thee upon his horse;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Spur post, and get before him to the king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll not be long behind; though I be old,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I doubt not but to ride as fast as York:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And never will I rise up from the ground</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till Bolingbroke have pardon’d thee. Away, be gone! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-3" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A royal palace.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Percy</b>, and other Lords.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Can no man tell me of my unthrifty son?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis full three months since I did see him last:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If any plague hang over us, ’tis he.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would to God, my lords, he might be found:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Inquire at London, ’mongst the taverns there,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For there, they say, he daily doth frequent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With unrestrained loose companions,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even such, they say, as stand in narrow lanes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And beat our watch, and rob our passengers;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which he, young wanton and effeminate boy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Takes on the point of honour to support</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So dissolute a crew.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Percy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, some two days since I saw the prince,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And told him of those triumphs held at Oxford.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>And what said the gallant?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Percy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>His answer was, he would unto the stews,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And from the common’st creature pluck a glove,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wear it as a favour; and with that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He would unhorse the lustiest challenger.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As dissolute as desperate; yet through both</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I see some sparks of better hope, which elder years</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May happily bring forth. But who comes here?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td>Where is the king?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What means our cousin, that he stares and looks</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So wildly?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>God save your grace! I do beseech your majesty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To have some conference with your grace alone.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Withdraw yourselves, and leave us here alone. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Percy</b> and Lords.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>What is the matter with our cousin now?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>For ever may my knees grow to the earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My tongue cleave to my roof within my mouth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless a pardon ere I rise or speak.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Intended or committed was this fault?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If on the first, how heinous e’er it be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To win thy after-love I pardon thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then give me leave that I may turn the key,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That no man enter till my tale be done.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>Have thy desire.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Within.</i> My liege, beware: look to thyself;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou hast a traitor in thy presence there.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>Villain, I’ll make thee safe. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Drawing.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td>Stay thy revengeful hand; thou hast no cause to fear.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Within.</i> Open the door, secure, foolhardy king:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall I for love speak treason to thy face?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Open the door, or I will break it open.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">York</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What is the matter, uncle? speak;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Recover breath; tell us how near is danger,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That we may arm us to encounter it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Peruse this writing here, and thou shalt know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The treason that my haste forbids me show.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Remember, as thou read’st, thy promise pass’d:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do repent me; read not my name there;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My heart is not confederate with my hand.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It was, villain, ere thy hand did set it down.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I tore it from the traitor’s bosom, king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fear, and not love, begets his penitence:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forget to pity him, lest thy pity prove</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A serpent that will sting thee to the heart.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O heinous, strong and bold conspiracy!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O loyal father of a treacherous son!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou sheer, immaculate and silver fountain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From when this stream through muddy passages</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath held his current and defiled himself!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy overflow of good converts to bad,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thy abundant goodness shall excuse</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This deadly blot in thy digressing son.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So shall my virtue be his vice’s bawd;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he shall spend mine honour with his shame,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As thriftless sons their scraping fathers’ gold.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mine honour lives when his dishonour dies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or my shamed life in his dishonour lies:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou kill’st me in his life; giving him breath,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The traitor lives, the true man’s put to death.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Within.</i> What ho, my liege! for God’s sake, let me in.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>What shrill-voiced suppliant makes this eager cry?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A woman, and thy aunt, great king; ’tis I.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speak with me, pity me, open the door:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A beggar begs that never begg’d before.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Our scene is alter’d from a serious thing,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now changed to “The Beggar and the King.”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My dangerous cousin, let your mother in:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know she is come to pray for your foul sin.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If thou do pardon, whosoever pray,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More sins for this forgiveness prosper may.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This fester’d joint cut off, the rest rest sound;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This let alone will all the rest confound.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O king, believe not this hard-hearted man!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Love loving not itself none other can.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou frantic woman, what dost thou make here?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall thy old dugs once more a traitor rear?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td>Sweet York, be patient. Hear me, gentle liege. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kneels.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>Rise up, good aunt.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not yet, I thee beseech:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For ever will I walk upon my knees,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And never see day that the happy sees,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till thou give joy; until thou bid me joy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By pardoning Rutland, my transgressing boy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td>Unto my mother’s prayers I bend my knee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Against them both my true joints bended be.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ill mayst thou thrive, if thou grant any grace!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Pleads he in earnest? look upon his face;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His eyes do drop no tears, his prayers are in jest;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His words come from his mouth, ours from our breast:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He prays but faintly and would be denied;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We pray with heart and soul and all beside:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His weary joints would gladly rise, I know;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our knees shall kneel till to the ground they grow:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His prayers are full of false hypocrisy;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ours of true zeal and deep integrity.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our prayers do out-pray his; then let them have</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That mercy which true prayer ought to have.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>Good aunt, stand up.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, do not say, “stand up;”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say, “pardon” first, and afterwards “stand up.”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And if I were thy nurse, thy tongue to teach,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Pardon” should be the first word of thy speech.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I never long’d to hear a word till now;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say “pardon,” king; let pity teach thee how:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The word is short, but not so short as sweet;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No word like “pardon” for kings’ mouths so meet.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td>Speak it in French, king; say, “<i xml:lang="fr">pardonne moi</i>.”</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Dost thou teach pardon pardon to destroy?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, my sour husband, my hard-hearted lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That set’st the word itself against the word!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speak “pardon” as ’tis current in our land;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The chopping French we do not understand.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thine eye begins to speak; set thy tongue there;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or in thy piteous heart plant thou thine ear;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That hearing how our plaints and prayers do pierce,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pity may move thee “pardon” to rehearse.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>Good aunt, stand up.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I do not sue to stand;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pardon is all the suit I have in hand.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>I pardon him, as God shall pardon me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O happy vantage of a kneeling knee!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet am I sick for fear: speak it again;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Twice saying “pardon” doth not pardon twain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But makes one pardon strong.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>With all my heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I pardon him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td>A god on earth thou art.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But for our trusty brother-in-law and the abbot,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With all the rest of that consorted crew,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Destruction straight shall dog them at the heels.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Good uncle, help to order several powers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Oxford, or where’er these traitors are:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They shall not live within this world, I swear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I will have them, if I once know where.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Uncle, farewell: and, cousin too, adieu:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your mother well hath pray’d, and prove you true.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
							<td>Come, my old son: I pray God make thee new. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-4" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The same.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Exton</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Servant</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Exton</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Didst thou not mark the king, what words he spake,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Have I no friend will rid me of this living fear?”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was it not so?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Servant</td>
							<td>These were his very words.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Exton</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>“Have I no friend?” quoth he: he spake it twice,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And urged it twice together, did he not?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Servant</td>
							<td>He did.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Exton</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And speaking it, he wistly look’d on me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And who should say, “I would thou wert the man</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That would divorce this terror from my heart;”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Meaning the king at Pomfret. Come, let’s go:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am the king’s friend, and will rid his foe. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-5" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Pomfret castle.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I have been studying how I may compare</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This prison where I live unto the world:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And for because the world is populous</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here is not a creature but myself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I cannot do it; yet I’ll hammer it out.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My brain I’ll prove the female to my soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My soul the father; and these two beget</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A generation of still-breeding thoughts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And these same thoughts people this little world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In humours like the people of this world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For no thought is contented. The better sort,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As thoughts of things divine, are intermix’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With scruples and do set the word itself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against the word:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As thus, “Come, little ones,” and then again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“It is as hard to come as for a camel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To thread the postern of a small needle’s eye.”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thoughts tending to ambition, they do plot</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unlikely wonders; how these vain weak nails</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May tear a passage through the flinty ribs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of this hard world, my ragged prison walls,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, for they cannot, die in their own pride.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thoughts tending to content flatter themselves</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That they are not the first of fortune’s slaves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor shall not be the last; like silly beggars</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who sitting in the stocks refuge their shame,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That many have and others must sit there;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in this thought they find a kind of ease,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bearing their own misfortunes on the back</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of such as have before endured the like.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thus play I in one person many people,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And none contented: sometimes am I king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then treasons make me wish myself a beggar,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so I am: then crushing penury</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Persuades me I was better when a king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then am I king’d again: and by and by</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Think that I am unking’d by Bolingbroke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And straight am nothing: but whate’er I be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor I nor any man that but man is</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With nothing shall be pleased, till he be eased</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With being nothing. Music do I hear? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Music.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ha, ha! keep time: how sour sweet music is,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When time is broke and no proportion kept!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So is it in the music of men’s lives.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here have I the daintiness of ear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To check time broke in a disorder’d string;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But for the concord of my state and time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had not an ear to hear my true time broke.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I wasted time, and now doth time waste me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For now hath time made me his numbering clock:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My thoughts are minutes; and with sighs they jar</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their watches on unto mine eyes, the outward watch,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whereto my finger, like a dial’s point,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is pointing still, in cleansing them from tears.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now sir, the sound that tells what hour it is</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are clamorous groans, which strike upon my heart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which is the bell: so sighs and tears and groans</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Show minutes, times, and hours: but my time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Runs posting on in Bolingbroke’s proud joy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While I stand fooling here, his Jack o’ the clock.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This music mads me; let it sound no more;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For though it have holp madmen to their wits,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In me it seems it will make wise men mad.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet blessing on his heart that gives it me!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For ’tis a sign of love; and love to Richard</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is a strange brooch in this all-hating world.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Groom of the Stable</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Groom</td>
							<td>Hail, royal prince!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thanks, noble peer;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The cheapest of us is ten groats too dear.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What art thou? and how comest thou hither,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where no man never comes but that sad dog</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That brings me food to make misfortune live?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Groom</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I was a poor groom of thy stable, king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When thou wert king; who, travelling towards York,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With much ado at length have gotten leave</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To look upon my sometimes royal master’s face.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, how it yearn’d my heart when I beheld</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In London streets, that coronation-day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When Bolingbroke rode on roan Barbary,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That horse that thou so often hast bestrid,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That horse that I so carefully have dress’d!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Rode he on Barbary? Tell me, gentle friend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How went he under him?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Groom</td>
							<td>So proudly as if he disdain’d the ground.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So proud that Bolingbroke was on his back!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That jade hath eat bread from my royal hand;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This hand hath made him proud with clapping him.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would he not stumble? would he not fall down,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since pride must have a fall, and break the neck</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of that proud man that did usurp his back?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forgiveness, horse! why do I rail on thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since thou, created to be awed by man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wast born to bear? I was not made a horse;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet I bear a burthen like an ass,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Spurr’d, gall’d and tired by jauncing Bolingbroke.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Keeper</b>, with a dish.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Keeper</td>
							<td>Fellow, give place; here is no longer stay.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td>If thou love me, ’tis time thou wert away.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Groom</td>
							<td>What my tongue dares not, that my heart shall say. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Keeper</td>
							<td>My lord, will’t please you to fall to?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td>Taste of it first, as thou art wont to do.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Keeper</td>
							<td>My lord, I dare not: Sir Pierce of Exton, who lately came from the king, commands the contrary.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The devil take Henry of Lancaster and thee!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Patience is stale, and I am weary of it. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Beats the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Keeper</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Keeper</td>
							<td>Help, help, help!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Exton</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Servants</b>, armed.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How now! what means death in this rude assault?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Villain, thy own hand yields thy death’s instrument. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Snatching an axe from a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Servant</b> and killing him.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go thou, and fill another room in hell. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He kills another. Then <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Exton</b> strikes him down.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>That hand shall burn in never-quenching fire</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That staggers thus my person. Exton, thy fierce hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath with the king’s blood stain’d the king’s own land.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mount, mount, my soul! thy seat is up on high;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whilst my gross flesh sinks downward, here to die. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Dies.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Exton</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As full of valour as of royal blood:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both have I spill’d; O would the deed were good!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For now the devil, that told me I did well,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Says that this deed is chronicled in hell.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This dead king to the living king I’ll bear:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take hence the rest, and give them burial here. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-6" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Windsor castle.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">York</b>, with other Lords, and Attendants.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Kind uncle York, the latest news we hear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is that the rebels have consumed with fire</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our town of Cicester in Gloucestershire;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But whether they be ta’en or slain we hear not.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Welcome, my lord: what is the news?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>First, to thy sacred state wish I all happiness.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The next news is, I have to London sent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The heads of Oxford, Salisbury, Blunt, and Kent:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The manner of their taking may appear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At large discoursed in this paper here.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We thank thee, gentle Percy, for thy pains;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to thy worth will add right worthy gains.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Fitzwater</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fitzwater</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, I have from Oxford sent to London</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The heads of Brocas and Sir Bennet Seely,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Two of the dangerous consorted traitors</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That sought at Oxford thy dire overthrow.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thy pains, Fitzwater, shall not be forgot;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Right noble is thy merit, well I wot.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Percy</b>, and the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Carlisle</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Percy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The grand conspirator, Abbot of Westminster,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With clog of conscience and sour melancholy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath yielded up his body to the grave;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But here is Carlisle living, to abide</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy kingly doom and sentence of his pride.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Carlisle, this is your doom:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Choose out some secret place, some reverend room,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More than thou hast, and with it joy thy life;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So as thou livest in peace, die free from strife:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For though mine enemy thou hast ever been,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>High sparks of honour in thee have I seen.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Exton</b>, with persons bearing a coffin.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Exton</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Great king, within this coffin I present</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy buried fear: herein all breathless lies</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The mightiest of thy greatest enemies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Richard of Bordeaux, by me hither brought.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Exton, I thank thee not; for thou hast wrought</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A deed of slander with thy fatal hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon my head and all this famous land.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Exton</td>
							<td>From your own mouth, my lord, did I this deed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>They love not poison that do poison need,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor do I thee: though I did wish him dead,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I hate the murderer, love him murdered.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The guilt of conscience take thou for thy labour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But neither my good word nor princely favour:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With Cain go wander through shades of night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And never show thy head by day nor light.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lords, I protest, my soul is full of woe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That blood should sprinkle me to make me grow:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, mourn with me for that I do lament,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And put on sullen black incontinent:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll make a voyage to the Holy Land,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To wash this blood off from my guilty hand:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>March sadly after; grace my mournings here;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In weeping after this untimely bier. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
