<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-4-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Westminster Hall.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter, as to the Parliament, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Percy</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Fitzwater</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Surrey</b>, the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Carlisle</b>, the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Abbot of Westminster</b>, and another <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord</b>, Herald, Officers, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bagot</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Call forth Bagot.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, Bagot, freely speak thy mind;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What thou dost know of noble Gloucester’s death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who wrought it with the king, and who perform’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The bloody office of his timeless end.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bagot</td>
							<td>Then set before my face the Lord Aumerle.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>Cousin, stand forth, and look upon that man.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bagot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My Lord Aumerle, I know your daring tongue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Scorns to unsay what once it hath deliver’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In that dead time when Gloucester’s death was plotted,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I heard you say, “Is not my arm of length,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That reacheth from the restful English court</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As far as Calais, to mine uncle’s head?”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Amongst much other talk, that very time,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I heard you say that you had rather refuse</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The offer of an hundred thousand crowns</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than Bolingbroke’s return to England;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Adding withal, how blest this land would be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In this your cousin’s death.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Princes and noble lords,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What answer shall I make to this base man?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall I so much dishonour my fair stars,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On equal terms to give him chastisement?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Either I must, or have mine honour soil’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With the attainder of his slanderous lips.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is my gage, the manual seal of death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That marks thee out for hell: I say, thou liest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And will maintain what thou hast said is false</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In thy heart-blood, though being all too base</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To stain the temper of my knightly sword.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>Bagot, forbear; thou shalt not take it up.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Excepting one, I would he were the best</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In all this presence that hath moved me so.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fitzwater</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If that thy valour stand on sympathy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is my gage, Aumerle, in gage to thine:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By that fair sun which shows me where thou stand’st,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I heard thee say, and vauntingly thou spakest it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou wert cause of noble Gloucester’s death.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If thou deny’st it twenty times, thou liest;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I will turn thy falsehood to thy heart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where it was forged, with my rapier’s point.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td>Thou darest not, coward, live to see that day.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fitzwater</td>
							<td>Now by my soul, I would it were this hour.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td>Fitzwater, thou art damn’d to hell for this.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Percy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Aumerle, thou liest; his honour is as true</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In this appeal as thou art all unjust;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that thou art so, there I throw my gage,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To prove it on thee to the extremest point</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of mortal breathing: seize it, if thou darest.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>An if I do not, may my hands rot off</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And never brandish more revengeful steel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Over the glittering helmet of my foe!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Another Lord</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I task the earth to the like, forsworn Aumerle;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And spur thee on with full as many lies</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As may be holloa’d in thy treacherous ear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From sun to sun: there is my honour’s pawn;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Who sets me else? by heaven, I’ll throw at all:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have a thousand spirits in one breast,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To answer twenty thousand such as you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Surrey</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My Lord Fitzwater, I do remember well</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The very time Aumerle and you did talk.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fitzwater</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis very true: you were in presence then;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And you can witness with me this is true.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Surrey</td>
							<td>As false, by heaven, as heaven itself is true.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fitzwater</td>
							<td>Surrey, thou liest.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Surrey</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Dishonourable boy!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That lie shall lie so heavy on my sword,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That it shall render vengeance and revenge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till thou the lie-giver and that lie do lie</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In earth as quiet as thy father’s skull:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In proof whereof, there is my honour’s pawn;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fitzwater</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How fondly dost thou spur a forward horse!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I dare eat, or drink, or breathe, or live,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I dare meet Surrey in a wilderness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And spit upon him, whilst I say he lies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And lies, and lies: there is my bond of faith,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To tie thee to my strong correction.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I intend to thrive in this new world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Aumerle is guilty of my true appeal:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Besides, I heard the banish’d Norfolk say</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou, Aumerle, didst send two of thy men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To execute the noble duke at Calais.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Some honest Christian trust me with a gage,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Norfolk lies: here do I throw down this,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If he may be repeal’d, to try his honour.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>These differences shall all rest under gage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till Norfolk be repeal’d: repeal’d he shall be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, though mine enemy, restored again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To all his lands and signories: when he’s return’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against Aumerle we will enforce his trial.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Carlisle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That honourable day shall ne’er be seen.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Many a time hath banish’d Norfolk fought</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For Jesu Christ in glorious Christian field,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Streaming the ensign of the Christian cross</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against black pagans, Turks, and Saracens;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And toil’d with works of war, retired himself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Italy; and there at Venice gave</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His body to that pleasant country’s earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And his pure soul unto his captain Christ,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Under whose colours he had fought so long.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>Why, bishop, is Norfolk dead?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Carlisle</td>
							<td>As surely as I live, my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sweet peace conduct his sweet soul to the bosom</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of good old Abraham! Lords appellants,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your differences shall all rest under gage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till we assign you to your days of trial.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">York</b>, attended.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From plume-pluck’d Richard; who with willing soul</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Adopts thee heir, and his high sceptre yields</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the possession of thy royal hand:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ascend his throne, descending now from him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And long live Henry, fourth of that name!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>In God’s name, I’ll ascend the regal throne.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Carlisle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Marry, God forbid!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Worst in this royal presence may I speak,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would God that any in this noble presence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were enough noble to be upright judge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of noble Richard! then true noblesse would</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What subject can give sentence on his king?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And who sits here that is not Richard’s subject?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thieves are not judged but they are by to hear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Although apparent guilt be seen in them;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And shall the figure of God’s majesty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His captain, steward, deputy-elect,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Anointed, crowned, planted many years,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be judged by subject and inferior breath,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he himself not present? O, forfend it, God,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That in a Christian climate souls refined</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I speak to subjects, and a subject speaks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stirr’d up by God, thus boldly for his king.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My Lord of Hereford here, whom you call king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is a foul traitor to proud Hereford’s king:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And if you crown him, let me prophesy:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The blood of English shall manure the ground,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And future ages groan for this foul act;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Peace shall go sleep with Turks and infidels,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in this seat of peace tumultuous wars</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Disorder, horror, fear and mutiny</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall here inhabit, and this land be call’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The field of Golgotha and dead men’s skulls.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, if you raise this house against this house,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It will the woefullest division prove</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That ever fell upon this cursed earth.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Prevent it, resist it, let it not be so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest child, child’s children, cry against you “woe!”</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well have you argued, sir; and, for your pains,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of capital treason we arrest you here.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My Lord of Westminster, be it your charge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To keep him safely till his day of trial.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May it please you, lords, to grant the commons’ suit.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fetch hither Richard, that in common view</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He may surrender; so we shall proceed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Without suspicion.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td>I will be his conduct. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Lords, you that here are under our arrest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Procure your sureties for your days of answer.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Little are we beholding to your love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And little look’d for at your helping hands.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">York</b>, with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</b>, and Officers bearing the regalia.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Alack, why am I sent for to a king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before I have shook off the regal thoughts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wherewith I reign’d? I hardly yet have learn’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To insinuate, flatter, bow, and bend my limbs:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give sorrow leave awhile to tutor me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To this submission. Yet I well remember</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The favours of these men: were they not mine?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did they not sometime cry, “all hail!” to me?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So Judas did to Christ: but he, in twelve,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Found truth in all but one; I, in twelve thousand, none.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>God save the king! Will no man say amen?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Am I both priest and clerk? well then, amen.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>God save the king! although I be not he;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet, amen, if heaven do think him me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To do what service am I sent for hither?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To do that office of thine own good will</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which tired majesty did make thee offer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The resignation of thy state and crown</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Henry Bolingbroke.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Give me the crown. Here, cousin, seize the crown;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here cousin;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On this side my hand, and on that side yours.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now is this golden crown like a deep well</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That owes two buckets, filling one another,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The emptier ever dancing in the air,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The other down, unseen and full of water:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That bucket down and full of tears am I,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Drinking my griefs, whilst you mount up on high.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>I thought you had been willing to resign.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My crown I am; but still my griefs are mine:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You may my glories and my state depose,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But not my griefs; still am I king of those.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>Part of your cares you give me with your crown.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your cares set up do not pluck my cares down.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My care is loss of care, by old care done;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your care is gain of care, by new care won:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The cares I give I have, though given away;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They tend the crown, yet still with me they stay.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>Are you contented to resign the crown?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, no; no, ay; for I must nothing be;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore no no, for I resign to thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now mark me, how I will undo myself:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I give this heavy weight from off my head</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And this unwieldy sceptre from my hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The pride of kingly sway from out my heart;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With mine own tears I wash away my balm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With mine own hands I give away my crown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With mine own tongue deny my sacred state,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With mine own breath release all duty’s rites:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All pomp and majesty I do forswear;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My manors, rents, revenues I forego;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My acts, decrees, and statutes I deny:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>God pardon all oaths that are broke to me!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>God keep all vows unbroke that swear to thee!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make me, that nothing have, with nothing grieved,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou with all pleased, that hast all achieved!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Long mayst thou live in Richard’s seat to sit,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And soon lie Richard in an earthy pit!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>God save King Harry, unking’d Richard says,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And send him many years of sunshine days!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What more remains?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No more, but that you read</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These accusations and these grievous crimes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Committed by your person and your followers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against the state and profit of this land;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, by confessing them, the souls of men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May deem that you are worthily deposed.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Must I do so? and must I ravel out</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My weaved-up folly? Gentle Northumberland,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If thy offences were upon record,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would it not shame thee in so fair a troop</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To read a lecture of them? If thou wouldst,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There shouldst thou find one heinous article,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Containing the deposing of a king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And cracking the strong warrant of an oath,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mark’d with a blot, damn’d in the book of heaven:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nay, all of you that stand and look upon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whilst that my wretchedness doth bait myself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though some of you with Pilate wash your hands</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Showing an outward pity; yet you Pilates</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have here deliver’d me to my sour cross,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And water cannot wash away your sin.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td>My lord, dispatch; read o’er these articles.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Mine eyes are full of tears, I cannot see:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet salt water blinds them not so much</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But they can see a sort of traitors here.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nay, if I turn mine eyes upon myself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I find myself a traitor with the rest;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I have given here my soul’s consent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To undeck the pompous body of a king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Made glory base and sovereignty a slave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Proud majesty a subject, state a peasant.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td>My lord⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No lord of thine, thou haught insulting man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor no man’s lord; I have no name, no title,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No, not that name was given me at the font,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But ’tis usurp’d: alack the heavy day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I have worn so many winters out,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And know not now what name to call myself!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O that I were a mockery king of snow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Standing before the sun of Bolingbroke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To melt myself away in water-drops!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Good king, great king, and yet not greatly good,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An if my word be sterling yet in England,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let it command a mirror hither straight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That it may show me what a face I have,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since it is bankrupt of his majesty.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>Go some of you and fetch a looking-glass. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit an attendant.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td>Read o’er this paper while the glass doth come.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td>Fiend, thou torment’st me ere I come to hell!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>Urge it no more, my Lord Northumberland.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td>The commons will not then be satisfied.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>They shall be satisfied: I’ll read enough,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When I do see the very book indeed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where all my sins are writ, and that’s myself.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter Attendant, with a glass.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Give me the glass, and therein will I read.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No deeper wrinkles yet? hath sorrow struck</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So many blows upon this face of mine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And made no deeper wounds? O flattering glass,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like to my followers in prosperity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou dost beguile me! Was this face the face</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That every day under his household roof</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did keep ten thousand men? was this the face</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, like the sun, did make beholders wink?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was this the face that faced so many follies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And was at last out-faced by Bolingbroke?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A brittle glory shineth in this face:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As brittle as the glory is the face; <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Dashes the glass against the ground.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>For there it is, crack’d in a hundred shivers.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mark, silent king, the moral of this sport,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How soon my sorrow hath destroy’d my face.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The shadow of your sorrow hath destroy’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The shadow or your face.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Say that again.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The shadow of my sorrow! ha! let’s see:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis very true, my grief lies all within;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And these external manners of laments</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are merely shadows to the unseen grief</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That swells with silence in the tortured soul;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There lies the substance: and I thank thee, king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For thy great bounty, that not only givest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Me cause to wail but teachest me the way</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How to lament the cause. I’ll beg one boon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then be gone and trouble you no more.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall I obtain it?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>Name it, fair cousin.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>“Fair cousin”? I am greater than a king:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For when I was a king, my flatterers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were then but subjects; being now a subject,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have a king here to my flatterer.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being so great, I have no need to beg.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>Yet ask.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td>And shall I have?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>You shall.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td>Then give me leave to go.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>Whither?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td>Whither you will, so I were from your sights.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td>Go, some of you convey him to the Tower.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, good! convey? conveyers are you all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That rise thus nimbly by a true king’s fall. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Richard</b>, some <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lords</b>, and a Guard.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bolingbroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>On Wednesday next we solemnly set down</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our coronation: lords, prepare yourselves. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt all except the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Carlisle</b>, the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Abbot of Westminster</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Abbot</td>
							<td>A woeful pageant have we here beheld.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Carlisle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The woe’s to come; the children yet unborn.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aumerle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You holy clergymen, is there no plot</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To rid the realm of this pernicious blot?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Abbot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before I freely speak my mind herein,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You shall not only take the sacrament</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To bury mine intents, but also to effect</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whatever I shall happen to devise.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I see your brows are full of discontent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your hearts of sorrow and your eyes of tears:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come home with me to supper; and I’ll lay</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A plot shall show us all a merry day. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
